CRUISE REPORT: P16S
(Updated Feb 2015)



Highlights


                           Cruise Summary Information

               Section Designation  P16S
Expedition designation (ExpoCodes)  320620140320
                  Chief Scientists  Lynne Talley/SIO
                             Dates  2014-MAR-20 - 2014-MAY-05
                              Ship  RVIB Nathaniel B. Palmer
                     Ports of call  Hobart, Tasmania, AUS - Papeete, Tahiti, 
                                    French Polynesia

                                                   15° 01' S
             Geographic Boundaries  174° 0.1' E                 149° 57.18' W
                                                   66° 59.93' S

                                    Stations  86
      Floats and drifters deployed  30 drifters, 12 floats deployed
          Moorings deployed or recovered  0

                              Contact Information:

                                Dr. Lynne Talley
  Scripps Institution of Oceanography • University of California San Diego
              9500 Gilman Drive • La Jolla, CA • 92093-0230 

























                      US-Repeat Hydrography (GO-SHIP) P16S

                        RVIB Nathaniel B. Palmer NBP1403

                           20 March 2014 - 5 May 2014

            Hobart, Tasmania, AUS - Papeete, Tahiti, French Polynesia

                        Chief Scientist: Dr. Lynne Talley

                      Scripps Institution of Oceanography

                     Co-Chief Scientist: Dr. Brendan Carter

                              Princeton University







                                  Cruise Report

                                   5 May 2014

                                Rev. 31 July 2014






























                               Table of Contents


Highlights                                                                
     Title Page                                                           
     Table of Contents                                                    
     Summary                                                              
  
 1.  P16S NARRATIVE                                                       
     1.1.  Sampling Programs                                              
     1.2.  Successes and challenges                                       
             1.2.1.  Weather                                                
             1.2.2.  CTD wire problems                                      
             1.2.3.  Loss of NASA Hyperpro instrument (AOP measurements)    
             1.2.4.  Laboratory Conditions                                  
     1.3.  Preliminary results                                            
           Principal Investigators                                        
           Shipboard Personnel                                            
  
 2.  CTD/Hydrographic Measurements Program                                
     2.1.  Water Sampling Package                                         
     2.2.  Navigation and Bathymetry Data Acquisition                     
     2.3.  CTD Data Acquisition and Rosette Operation                     
     2.4.  CTD Cable Tension on Deep Casts                                
     2.5.  CTD Data Processing                                            
     2.6.  CTD Acquisition and Data Processing Details                    
     2.7.  CTD Sensor Laboratory Calibrations                             
     2.8.  CTD Shipboard Calibration Procedures                           
             2.8.1.  CTD Pressure                                         
             2.8.2.  CTD Temperature                                      
             2.8.3.  CTD Conductivity                                     
             2.8.4.  CTD Dissolved Oxygen                                 
     2.9.  Bottle Sampling                                                
     2.10. Bottle Tripping Issues                                        
     2.11. Bottle Data Processing                                        
     2.12. Salinity Analysis                                             
     2.13. Oxygen Analysis                                               
     2.14. Nutrient Analysis                                             
     References                                                           
     Appendix 2.A:  CTD Temperature and Conductivity                      
                    ITS-90 Temperature Coefficients                       
                    Conductivity Coefficients                             
     Appendix 2.B:  CTD Oxygen Time Constants                             
                    Conversion Equation Coefficients for CTD Oxygen  
     Appendix 2.C:  Bottle Quality Comments                               
     Appendix 2.D:  Pre-Cruise Sensor Laboratory Calibrations             
                    Pressure Calibration Report: STS/ODF Calibration 
                      Facility                                            
                    Temperature Calibration Report: STS/ODF Calibration 
                      Facility                                             
  
 3.  CHLOROFLUOROCARBON, SULFUR HEXAFLUORIDE, AND NITROUS OXIDE           
     3.1.  Measurements                                                   
     3.2.  Analytical Difficulties                                        
     3.3.  References                                                     
  
 4.  DISSOLVED INORGANIC CARBON                                           
     4.1.  Sample collection                                              
     4.2.  Equipment                                                      
     4.3.  Calibration, Accuracy, and Precision                           
     4.4.  Summary                                                        
     4.5.  References                                                     
  
 5.  DISCRETE pH ANALYSES                                                 
     5.1.  Sampling                                                       
     5.2.  Analysis                                                       
     5.3.  Reagents                                                       
     5.4.  Standardization/Results                                        
     5.5.  Data Processing                                                
     5.6.  References                                                     
  
 6.  ALKALINITY                                                           
     6.1.  Sample Collection                                              
     6.2.  Summary                                                        
     6.3.  Quality Control                                                
     6.4.  Reference                                                      
 7.  CARBON ISOTOPES IN SEAWATER [DIC]                                    
  
 8.  DISSOLVED ORGANIC CARBON AND TOTAL DISSOLVED 
     NITROGEN                                                             
  
 9.  TRITIUM, HELIUM AND 18O                                              
  
10.  δ15N-NO3/δ18O-NO3                                                    
     10.1. Overview                                                       
     10.2. Sample Collection                                              
     10.3. Sample Measurement                                             
     10.4. References                                                     
  
11.  δ30Si                                                                
     11.1.  Overview                                                      
     11.2.  Sample collection                                             
     11.3.  Sample mesurement                                             
   
12.  CALCIUM SAMPLING                                                     
  
13.  TRANSMISSOMETER SHIPBOARD PROCEDURES                                 
     13.1.  Instrument: WET Labs C-Star Transmissometer - S/N CST-1636DR  
     13.2.  Air Calibration                                               
     13.3.  Deck Procedures                                               
     13.4.  Summary                                                       
  
14.  LOWERED ACOUSTIC DOPPLER CURRENT PROFILER (LADCP) DATA               
     14.1.  System description                                            
            Operating parameters                                          
            The WH150 control file                                        
            Data processing                                               
     14.2.  Data gathered                                                 
            Problems encountered                                          
            Sample data plots                                             
  
15.  CHIPODS                                                              
  
16.  A NOTE ON WIRE TENSION DURING CLIVAR/GOSHIP P16S 2014                
  
17.  SURFACE DRIFTERS (GLOBAL SURFACE VELOCITY PROGRAM)                   
  
18.  ARGO AND ARGO-EQUIVALENT BIOGEOCHEMICAL FLOATS                       
     18.1.  Deployments from RVIB NB Palmer                               
     18.2.  Float data and engineering information                        
            18.2.a.  Temperature/salinity profiles reporting to Argo 
                       data servers                                       
            18.2.b.  Float information and statistics to U. 
                       Washington data server                             
            18.2.c.  T, S, oxygen, nitrate, pH, fluorescence (chloro-
                       phyll) and backscatter data to MBARI floatviz 
                       data server                                        
     18.3. Data quality                                                   
     Appendix 18.A:  (Mis-) Calibration of the Deep-Sea DuraFET 
                       pH sensors                                         
  
19.  NASA OCEAN BIOLOGY/BIOGEOCHEMISTRY PROGRAM                           
     19.1.  NASA Science Objectives                                       
     19.2.  Tables and Figures                                            
  
20.  Data Report NBP1403                                                  
     20.1.  Introduction                                                  
     20.2.  Distribution Contents at a Glance                             
     20.3.  Distribution Contents                                         
     20.4.  Acquisition Problems and Events                               
     20.5.  Appendix: Sensors and Calibrations                            
  
CCHDO Data Processing Notes                                               




























Summary 

The P16S quasi-decadal hydrographic survey was conducted from the Ross Sea 
through the Southern Ocean and finished in the South Pacific Ocean aboard the 
Edison Chouest RVIB Nathaniel B. Palmer vessel from 20 March 2014 - 5 May 2014. 
86 of the 90 rosette/CTD/LADCP/chipod stations were occupied along the 
southernmost portion of the P16S starting at 67°S and running northward along 
longitude 150°W to 15°S. The first 4 stations were occupied as biogeochemical 
float calibration stations during the transit from Hobart to the beginning of 
P16S hydrographic transect. 

Most CTD casts extended to within 10 meters of the seafloor, and up to 36 water 
samples were collected throughout the water column. CTDO (conductivity, 
temperature, pressure, oxygen), transmissometer, fluorometer, LADCP (lowered 
acoustic Doppler current profiler) and chipod (temperature diffusivity 
instrumentation) electronic data were collected; rosette water samples were 
collected from the rosette/CTD/LADCP/chipod package. 14 Hyperpro "Javelin" and 
36 IOP Bio-optic casts were carried out by the NASA/CDOM group. 30 Global 
Drifter Program surface drifters were deployed on behalf of Rick Lumpkin of 
NOAA/AOML. 12 biogeochemical floats were deployed on behalf of Steve Riser 
(University of Washington) and Ken Johnson (MBARI). 

Salinity and dissolved oxygen samples, drawn from most bottles on every full 
cast, were analyzed and used to calibrate the CTD conductivity and oxygen 
sensors. Water samples were also analyzed on board the ship for nutrients 
(silicate, phosphate, nitrate, nitrite), total CO2/TCO2 (aka dissolved inorganic 
Carbon/DIC), pH, total alkalinity, N2O, and transient tracers (CFCs and SF6). 

Additional water samples were collected and stored for analysis onshore: 3Helium 
/ Tritium, ∂18O, 13C/ 14C, dissolved organic Carbon and total dissolved Nitrogen 
(DOC / TDN), ∂15N-NO3, ∂18O-NO3, Calcium, HPLC, CDOM and ∂30Si. 

Discrete dissolved oxygen, pH, DIC, total alkalinity, salinity, and nutrient 
samples were drawn and analyzed from the ship's flow-through underway system. 
Continuous underway measurements included GPS navigation, multibeam bathymetry, 
ADCP, meteorological parameters, sea surface measurements (including 
temperature, conductivity/salinity, fluorescence), and gravity. In addition to 
the permanently installed RVIB Nathaniel B. Palmer systems, an underway pCO2 
system designed by Taro Takahashi (LDEO) collected data throughout the cruise. 



1.  P16S NARRATIVE - L. Talley, Chief Scientist 

RVIB Nathaniel B. Palmer cruise NBP1403 had three major independent funded 
projects: 1. U.S. Repeat Hydrography/CLIVAR section P16S along 150°W, 67°S-15°S 
(NSF, NOAA) (90 stations completed); 2. Biogeochemical Argo-equivalent float 
deployments (12 floats, NSF/NOAA); 3. Ocean optical/pigment observations for 
satellite ocean color validation (NASA). 



1.1.  Sampling Programs

We sampled or deployed instruments for 18 different principal investigators, 
with NSF, NOAA, and NASA funding. In addition to the core set of funded 
projects, we also deployed 30 surface drifters in support of the Global Surface 
Velocity Program, and collected water samples for three unfunded experimental 
projects. Our science party of 29 included one postdoc (co-chief scientist) and 
11 students (CFC, alkalinity, pH, DOC, C14, CTD watch standers). 

The 90 P16S stations repeat two earlier transects, in 1991 (World Ocean 
Circulation Experiment) and 2005 (U.S. Repeat Hydrography). A segment of 150°W 
in the Ross Sea from 67°S to the Antarctic continent was occupied in 2011 on the 
RVIB Palmer as part of the S04P section, and can be considered part of this 
decades' repeat of 150°W. 

The temperature/salinity profiling on the 12 BGC floats is part of the global 
Argo float array, profiling every 10 days to 2000 m depth. The group of floats 
is the first set of fully-equipped Southern Ocean biogeochemical profiling 
floats, measuring oxygen, nitrate, fluorescence and backscatter, and newly-
developed pH. The southernmost group has sea ice avoidance software. 

The NASA optical program included (a) profiling to 200 m for inherent optical 
properties (IOP) almost every day of operations and (b) hand-held casts for 
apparent optical properties (AOP) close to noon on the 14 days when the weather 
and sea conditions were favorable. 

The work began with a 6 day transit from Hobart, Tasmania to the first station. 
The first four stations were along the great circle route to the 150°W section. 
These stations were for the purpose of BGC float deployments, and were 
accompanied by a CTD/rosette profile with nutrient, salt, oxygen, carbon and 
fluorescence measurements for purposes of float calibration/validation. To test 
all equipment and sampling, and because full-depth stations take little 
additional time compared with 2000 m stations necessary for the floats, three of 
these stations were occupied to the ocean bottom. Station 3 was to 2000 m due to 
weather  (see "slowdown" comments below). 

On day 11 (31 March), we reached the southernmost end of the P16S section at 
67°S and began working northward at 30 nm spacing for P16S. Station spacing was 
increased to 40 nm starting at Station 39 (49°S) because of time lost to weather 
and wire problems. The last station was completed on 4 May 2014. NASA bio-
optical sampling (IOP) was done once a day when sampling (CTD/rosette) was 
possible, and AOP sampling on 14 days when conditions permitted. 



Samples were filled from a 36 bottle sampling rosette with seawater collected 
from depths ranging from the ocean surface to ~5600 m. Samples for various 
analyses were collected from the rosette in the following order: 

    1. CFCs, N2O, CCl4 
    2. Helium 
    3. Dissolved oxygen 
    4. Total dissolved inorganic carbon 
    5. pH 
    6. Total alkalinity 
    7. Carbon isotopes (δ14C, δ 13C) 
    8. Dissolved organic carbon 
    9. Nutrients 
   10. δ15N-NO3/δ18O-NO3 
   11. Salinity 
   12. Colored dissolved organic matter 
   13. δ30Si 
   14. Pigments 


1.2.  Successes and challenges 

The cruise can be judged mostly successful. 90 stations were completed, 81 of 
them to the ocean bottom, and all with excellent data. 12 biogeochemical floats 
were deployed and all have returned their initial profiles and one or two 
subsequent profiles prior to June, 2014 (5- and 10-day timing separation between 
profiles). The NASA biooptical program was able to operate casts most days, 
collecting the farthest south ever Apparent Optical Property profile for 
satellite cal/val. 

The intricate operation of the many sampling programs and laboratory analyses 
worked extremely well, due to the professionalism, experience and high standards 
of the science party. The Antarctic Support Contractor (ASC) personnel were 
central to the success of daily operations, from planning and supporting all 
deck operations with knowledgeable and creative solutions to challenges. The 
Edison Chouest Offshore (ECO) ship operation was highly professional and easy to 
work with. Daily teamwork between the three groups (ECO, ASC and science) is 
central to successful scientific operations. When major challenges arose (CTD 
wire change; Hyperpro loss), the 3-way collaboration worked well. 

Delays and incomplete science resulted from weather (many delays prior to 
Station 39), malfunctioning of the CTD conducting wire (affecting Stations 31-
39), and from loss of a Hyperpro IOP package for the NASA ocean color mission 
(section 19). 



1.2.1.  Weather 

About half of our stations were located south of 50°S, where wind and seas 
(March and April) were very rough. The ship spent 68 hours waiting on weather 
based on engine room logs. In addition to work stoppage, rough conditions 
affected wire tension, ship speed, and ability to sample while underway after 
Station 39 when the rosette was moved to the outside main deck/backup wire. Our 
average wire speed for the cruise was on the order of 45 m/min, with slow starts 
at each station, ramping up to 60 m/min far into the cast. Ship steaming speed 
was often less than 9 knots. The net impact was a reduction in total number of 
stations from the projected 105 stations to 90, a gap in stations between 61°S 
and 62°30'S, and expansion of station spacing to 40 nm from 49°S to 15°S. The 
cruise request was based on an assumption of 4 hours per station and 9 knots 
steaming speed, plus two days for weather. On the 150°W section, our station 
time (CTD in the water) averaged 3.5 hours, wirespeed averaged 38 m/min and 
steaming speed averaged 7.7 knots (including positioning, and waiting for 
sampling). South of 50°S, our station time averaged 2.9 hours. Wirespeed 
averaged 41 m/min and steaming speed averaged 7.1 knots.

Overall, wirespeeds were less than optimal because of restrictions due to wire 
tension requirements (see Section 16).

Severe weather affecting Station 3 and float 7567. Severe weather resulted in a 
shift of Station 3 and its float deployment somewhat to the east along the great 
circle transit to the P16S line. The requirement for stations 1 through 4 was to 
reach 2000 m but we sampled to the bottom on Stations 1, 2 and 4 as the 
additional time was minimal and this provided both full water-column profiles 
for the carbon algorithm to be used with the floats, and the opportunity to test 
all shipboard and laboratory equipment prior to the start of P16S line. Station 
3 was occupied only to 2000 m because of the extremely rough deployment 
conditions. Float 7567, deployed under rough conditions, was the only float of 
the 12 with compromised data return, although it appears to have recovered and 
is reporting good data (as of Jan 2015). 

Severe weather affecting Station 10 through 23 (64°S to 57°S; April 2-9, 2014; 
52.43 hours of Wait-on-Weather). To minimize work stoppage/slow-downs due to 
extremely rough conditions that began at 64°S, and with a weather forecast for 
even more protracted "wait-on-weather", we steamed northward from 62°30'S 
(Station 14) to 58°S (thus becoming station 15), and then occupied stations back 
southward at 1° spacing, to 61°S (Station 19). Because of time and the negative 
weather forecast, we abandoned the stations at 62°S and 61°30'S. We then 
proceeded northward, filling in the 0.5° stations to 57°30'S (Station 22), and 
then recommenced regular 30 nm spacing, in order to best capture this important 
set of stations across the Antarctic Circumpolar Current. 

Weather affecting Stations 24 through 34 (57°S to 51°S; April 10-13, 2014; 16 
hours of Wait-on-Weather). Weather stoppages and slowdowns affected these 
stations only by slowing the rate, but did not result in any changes in cruise 
plan. North of 51°S, we were slowed for weather several additional times 
(stations 55-56, 65-66, 75-77) but there were no work stoppages. 

1.2.2.  CTD wire problems 

Affecting Stations 31-38, and 39 (April 12-15, 2014). Stations 31-38 were 
truncated at 4100 to 4200 m wire out. Multiple outer strand breakages on the 
Baltic Room CTD wire were first noted at ˜4200 m wire out at Station 30. While 
Stations 1, 5 and 6 were deeper, the problem was not noted then, although it was 
noticed at Station 1 that the wire was increasingly rusty farther down in the 
spool. (This was surprising as the wire was reportedly only two years old). 
After Station 30, it was determined that it was too risky to use the wire beyond 
4100 / 4200 m. The upper waterfall winch (UWW) wire was spooled out to 3000 m 
with a lead weight attached, and was judged to be in excellent condition, even 
though we were told that the wire was 16 years old. (We have raised a question, 
currently unresolved, about the accuracy of the ASC's CTD wire log information 
since the "new" wire on the Baltic Room winch had all of the characteristics of 
a very well-used wire, including significant rust and very little rotation 
associated with unwinding, whereas the "old" wire on the UWW had the 
characteristics of a new wire, with very little wear, and extremely large 
rotation/unwinding on the first several casts, settling into lesser but still 
large rotation on all remaining casts.). Because of previous time losses due to 
weather, the Chief Scientist decided to continue with Stations 31-38 to just 
˜4100 m on the Baltic Room winch while ASC and ECO carefully considered the 
various options for switching to the backup wire. The height off the bottom for 
these 8 casts over rough topography ranged from 77 to 847 m, averaging 378 m 
(see Section 2.1).

Station 39 depth was > 4900 m, with a long set of stations thereafter deeper 
than 5000. It was scientifically important to ensure switching to the UWW CTD 
wire prior to Station 39 rather than continue with truncated stations. The 
possibility of spooling the wire from the UWW to the Baltic Room winch was 
considered in great detail, but was determined to be possible only in excellent 
weather conditions, which were highly unlikely. 

It was decided to go ahead and use the UWW winch and wire, although the 
incorrect sheave had been mounted on the starboard A-frame prior to departure 
from Hobart. The crane operation necessary for switching sheaves was ruled out  
because of the suboptimal weather conditions. The smooth and efficient rosette 
transfer took place between Stations 38 and 39, which was coincidentally a day 
of calmer seas and lower wind than usual. The CTD was attached to both the 
Baltic room and Upper Waterfall Winch wires, lowered into the surface water from 
the Baltic Room, and then swung over and landed on the main deck in front of the 
latter winch. From that point onward, all CTD and sampling operations were 
outdoors on the main deck. 

Station 39, the first with the Upper Waterfall Winch, was undertaken with very 
slow winch speed (6.4 hour station time) because there was little information 
about the wire and its condition, and to minimize large tension spikes. Station 
39 nevertheless had significant electrical problems, traced to the winch. A 
number of winch electrical modifications were made between Stations 39 and 40. 
Station 40 and stations thereafter were excellent and we were able to resume 
normal operations. 

Slowdowns associated with this operation added up to about 12.2 hours. These CTD 
wire problems significantly compromised data for 9 of our total of 86 stations 
along P16S.

1.2.3.  Loss of NASA Hyperpro instrument (AOP measurements) 

The hand-deployed NASA Hyperpro instrument was lost during a cast at Station 80, 
when the wire was caught in the propeller. Circumstances were extensively 
documented by ECO, ASC and the NASA scientists, and are described in the NASA 
cruise report (Section 19 below). The backup instrument was employed on May 1. 
Lack of deployment of the backup on May 2 was requested by the ECO home office, 
but permission was obtained to deploy a final station on May 3, the last day for 
sampling (see Section 19.1). 

1.2.4.  Laboratory Conditions 

The laboratories were spacious and well appointed with shelving and storage 
space. The computer laboratories provided excellent working conditions for our 
large group of computer-based scientists. The ASC IT and MLT support for the 
labs was excellent. 

There were two compromising laboratory issues. The DIC laboratory van was 
installed on the main deck, which was often secured due to bad weather, as the 
low-to-the-water deck is routinely awash in even the normal (high) sea state of 
the Southern Ocean. A large wave damaged the DIC van, after which the DIC 
analysis was moved into the aft dry lab. It would have been very helpful if ASC 
had advised in advance that all active laboratory vans be located on upper decks 
(the location of the CFC van), but the extensive administrative planning process 
somehow failed to recognize this important issue (see Section 4). 

Temperatures in the aft dry lab, which hosted four chemistry lab groups, ranged 
from 14° to 31°C through the cruise, which was unsatisfactory (see Section 4). 
The higher temperatures, encountered near the end of the cruise because of the 
high ambient seawater temperatures used for cooling on the Palmer, resulted in 
reduced numbers of analyses that could be processed. The ECO engineers and ASC 
staff worked hard to bring the temperatures under control, but the problem was 
only partially alleviated. "Cold" water in the taps and showers was as hot as 
113°F over the last three days of the cruise. As this is a structural problem 
for the Palmer, improved laboratory temperature regulation as well as provision 
of cool water may require renovation; meanwhile we recommend that deployments in 
tropical regions be limited. 



1.3.  Preliminary results 

The Ross Sea bottom waters continue to warm, with a monotonic increase over the 
4 WOCE/CLIVAR surveys thus far: 1992, 2005, 2011, and now 2014. The bottom 1000 
m thick layer is nearly adiabatic (well mixed with lower temperature variance 
than the abyssal thermocline above it), and can be easily compared from one 
survey to the next. Additionally, we note that the entire deep temperature 
structure has shifted from cooler to warmer, and hence it appears that the 
warming of the bottom layer is partly a function of warming of the deep layer 
from 2500 to 4500 m. 

An energetic subthermocline eddy or internal wave was observed at 45°S (Station 
45), with westward flow of >30 cm/sec at 1200-1800m, and 300 m isopycnal 
deflections. This extremely anomalous feature had a weak anticyclonic surface 
expression, and was located well north of the most energetic part of the ACC's 
eddy field. The feature was principally an isopycnal deflection with only weak 
property anomalies along isopycnals through the feature. It was clear in the 
deep-reaching SADCP velocity. Diapycnal diffusivity calculated from fine-
structure parameterization using the CTD and LADCP profile data, was enhanced 
above and below the feature. Vertical velocities processed from the LADCP data 
by A Thurnherr (LDEO) showed signatures of high frequency internal waves in the 
high stratification above and below the stretched isopycnals at the core of the 
feature. Several mechanisms for generation of this feature are being explored. 


Principal Investigators for US-Repeat Hydrography(GO-SHIP) P16S 

Program                       Affiliation*   Principal Investigator  email
----------------------------  -------------  ----------------------  ---------------------------
CTDO/Rosette, Nutrients, O2,  UCSD/SIO       Lynne Talley            ltalley@ucsd.edu
Salinity, Data Management     UCSD/SIO       James H. Swift          jswift@ucsd.edu

Transmissometer               TAMU           Wilf Gardner            wgardner@ocean.tamu.edu

ADCP , LADCP                  U Hawaii       Eric Firing             efiring@soest.hawaii.edu

Chipod (T variance)           OSU            Jonathan Nash           nash@coas.oregonstate.edu
                              OSU            James Moum              moum@coas.oregonstate.edu
                              UCSD/SIO       Jennifer Mackinnon      jmackinn@ucsd.edu

CFCs , SF6, N2O               U Washington   Mark Warner             mwarner@uw.edu

3He , 3H                      LDEO           Peter Schlosser         schlosser@ldeo.columbia.edu

DIC (Total CO2)               NOAA/PMEL      Richard Feely           Richard.A.Feely@noaa.gov
  
pH , Total Alkalinity         UCSD/SIO       Andrew Dickson          adickson@ucsd.edu

DOC , TDN                     UCSB           Craig Carlson           carlson@lifesci.ucsb.edu

Radiocarbons (13C , 14C)      WHOI           Ann McNichol            amcnichol@whoi.edu
                              Princeton      Robert Key              key@princeton.edu

∂15N-NO3 , ∂18O-NO3           Princeton      Daniel Sigman           sigman@princeton.edu

Dissolved Calcium             UCSD/SIO       Todd Martz              trmartz@ucsd.edu

∂30Si                         Princeton      Greg de Souza           gfds@princeton.edu

Pigments HPLC                 NASA           Joaquin Chaves Cedeño   joaquin.e.chavescedeno@nasa.gov

CDOM                          NASA           Joaquin Chaves Cedeño   joaquin.e.chavescedeno@nasa.gov
                              UCSB           Norm Nelson             norm.nelson@ucsb.edu

IOP Cage                      NASA           Joaquin Chaves Cedeño   joaquin.e.chavescedeno@nasa.gov
Hyperpro "Javelin"   

Biogeochemical Floats         Pre-SOCCOM/UW  Stephen Riser           riser@ocean.washington.edu
                              MBARI          Ken Johnson             johnson@mbari.org

Surface Drifters              GDP/NOAA/AOML  Shaun Dolk              shaun.dolk@noaa.gov

pCO2 Underway Data            LDEO           Taro Takahashi          Takahashi@ldeo.columbia.edu
                              NOAA/AOML      Rik Wanninkhof          rik.wanninkhof@noaa.gov

Ship's Underway Data          USAP           Joe Tarnow              Joe.Tarnow.Contractor@usap.gov
                              USAP           Bryan Chambers          Bryan.Chambers.Contractor@nbp.usap.gov

*Affiliation abbreviations listed on page 7 



Shipboard Personnel on US-Repeat Hydrography(GO-SHIP) P16S 

Name                   Affiliation*   Shipboard Duties                 Shore Email 
---------------------  -------------  -------------------------------  ------------------------------------------
Lynne Talley           SIO/CASPO      Chief Scientist                  ltalley@ucsd.edu
Brendan Carter         Princeton      Co-Chief Scientist               brendan.carter@gmail.com
Tonia Capuano          UBO            CTD                              toniacapuano@yahoo.it
Tyler Hennon           U.Washington   CTD/Argo/chipod                  thennon@uw.edu
Eric Sánchez Muñoz     U.Concepción   CTD                              erisanchez@udec.cl
Isabella Rosso         ANU            CTD/ Drifter                     isa.rosso@anu.edu.au
Elizabeth Simons       FSU            CTD/ Drifters                    egs07d@fsu.edu
Veronica Tamsitt       SIO/CASPO      CTD/LADCP                        vtamsitt@ucsd.edu
Steven Howell          U.Hawaii       LADCP/ADCP                       sghowell@hawaii.edu
Susan Becker           SIO/STS/ODF    Nutrients/ODF Supervisor         sbecker@ucsd.edu
Mary Carol Johnson     SIO/STS/ODF    O2/Data Processor                mcj@ucsd.edu
John Calderwood        SIO/STS/RT     CTD/Elect. Tech./Salinity        jcalderwood@ucsd.edu
Melissa Miller         SIO/STS/ODF    Nutrients/Bottle Data            melissa-miller@ucsd.edu
Courtney Schatzman     SIO/STS/ODF    CTD/Data Processor/Website       cschatzman@ucsd.edu
Andrew Barna           SIO/CCHDO      O2/Bottle Data                   abarna@ucsd.edu
Mike DePolo            SIO/STS/RT     CTD/Salinity                     mdepolo@ucsd.edu
Dana Greeley           NOAA/PMEL      DIC                              Dana.Greeley@noaa.gov
Charles Featherstone   NOAA/PMEL      DIC                              Charles.Featherstone@noaa.gov
David Cervantes        SIO/MPL        Total Alkalinity/pH              d1cervantes@ucsd.edu
John (Adam) Radich     SIO/MPL        Total Alkalinity/pH              jradich@ucsd.edu
Ellen Briggs           SIO/MCG        Total Alkalinity/pH              ebriggs@ucsd.edu
Mark Warner            U. Washington  CFC                              mwarner@ocean.washington.edu
Patrick Mears          U. Texas       CFC                              patrickamears@gmail.com
Katie Kirk             WHOI           CFC                              kkirk@whoi.edu
Anthony Dachille       LDEO           3He/Tritium                      dachille@ldeo.columbia.edu
Nicholas Huynh         UCSB           C13/C14 + DOC/TDN Sampling       nicholasqhuynh@gmail.com
Joaquin Chaves Cedeño  NASA           IOP/ Hyper Pro/CDOM/HPLC         joaquin.e.chavescedeno@nasa.gov
Scott Freeman          NASA           IOP/ Hyper Pro/CDOM/HPLC         scott.a.freeman@nasa.gov
Michael Novak          NASA           IOP/ Hyper Pro/CDOM/HPLC         michael.novak@nasa.gov
Ken Vicknair           USAP           Marine Project Coor.             Ken.Vicknair.Contractor@nbp.usap.gov
Joe Tarnow             USAP           Network Admin./Underway Data     Joe.Tarnow.Contractor@usap.gov
Bryan Chambers         USAP           Network Admin./Underway Data     Bryan.Chambers.Contractor@nbp.usap.gov
George Aukon           USAP           Electronics Tech.                George.Aukon.Contractor@nbp.usap.gov
Barry Bjork            USAP           Electronics Tech.                Barry.Bjork.Contractor@nbp.usap.gov
John Betz              USAP           Marine Lab Tech./Safety Officer  John.Betz.Contractor@nbp.usap.gov
Julia Carleton         USAP           Marine Tech./Deck                Julia.Carleton.Contractor@nbp.usap.gov
Mackenzie Haberman     USAP           Marine Tech./Deck                Mackenzie.Haberman.Contractor@nbp.usap.gov
Meghan King            USAP           Marine Tech./Deck                Meghan.King.Contractor@nbp.usap.gov

*Affiliation abbreviations are listed on page 7 



               KEY to Institution Abbreviations

ANU            Australian National University 
CASPO          Climate Atmospheric Sciences and Physical Oceanography(SIO) 
CCHDO          CLIVAR/Carbon Hydrographic Data Office (SIO) 
GDP            Global Drifter Program 
LDEO           Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory (Columbia University) 
MPL            Marine Physical Laboratory (SIO) 
MBARI          Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute 
MCG            Marine Chemistry and Geochemistry (SIO) 
NASA           National Aeronautic and Space Administration 
NOAA           National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
ODF            Oceanographic Data Facility (SIO/STS) 
OSU            Oregon State University 
PMEL           Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory (NOAA) 
RT             Research Technicians (SIO/STS) 
SIO            Scripps Institution of Oceanography(UCSD) 
SOMTS          Ship Operations and Marine Technical Support (SIO) 
STS            Shipboard Technical Support (SIO) 
TAMU           Texas Agricultural and Mechanical Engineering University 
UBO            Universitè de Bretagne Occidentale (France) 
U. Concepción  Universidad of Concepción(Chile) 
UCSD           University of California, San Diego 
UCSB           University of California, Santa Barbara 
U. Hawaii      University of Hawaii 
USAP           United States Antarctic Program 
U. Texas       University of Texas at Austin 
U. Washington  University of Washington 
WHOI           Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution 




2.  Core Hydrographic Measurements: CTD Data, Salinity, Oxygen and Nutrients 

    Oceanographic Data Facility and Research Technicians 
    Shipboard Technical Support 
    Scripps Institution of Oceanography 
    UC San Diego 
    La Jolla, CA 92093-0214 

The US-Repeat Hydrography(GO-SHIP) P16S repeat hydrographic line was reoccupied 
for the United States Repeat Hydrograph Carbon Program from 20 March 2014 -5May 
2014 aboard RVIB Nathaniel B. Palmer during a survey consisting of 
rosette/CTD/LADCP/chipod stations and a variety of underway measurements. The 
ship departed Hobart, Tasmania, AUS on 20 March 2014 and arrived Papeete, 
Tahiti, French Polynesia on 5 May 2014 (UTC dates). 

A sea-going science team gathered from 15 oceanographic institutions 
participated on the cruise. The programs and PIs, and the shipboard science team 
and their responsibilities, are listed in the Narrative section. 

A total of 90 stations were occupied with one rosette/CTD/LADCP/chipod cast 
completed at each. 2 aborted cast(s) were not reported. CTDO data and water 
samples were collected on each rosette/CTD/LADCP/chipod cast, usually to within 
10 meters of the bottom. Water samples measured on board or stored for shore 
analysis are tabulated in the Bottle Sampling section. 

Pressure, temperature, conductivity/salinity, dissolved oxygen, fluorometer and 
transmissometer data were recorded from CTD profiles. Current velocities were 
measured by the LADCP. Core hydrographic measurements consisted of salinity, 
dissolved oxygen and nutrient water samples taken from each rosette cast. The 
distribution of samples is shown in the following figures. 


Figure 2.1: P16S Sample Distribution, Stations 5-90 


2.1. Water Sampling Package 

Rosette/CTD/LADCP/chipod casts were performed with a package consisting of a 36-
bottle rosette frame (SIO/STS), a 36-place carousel (SBE32) and 10.0L Bullister-
style bottles (SIO/STS) with an absolute volume of 10.4L. Underwater electronic 
components consisted of a Sea-Bird Electronics SBE9plus CTD with dual pumps 
(SBE5), dual temperature sensors (SBE3plus), dual conductivity sensors (SBE4C), 
dissolved oxygen (SBE43), chlorophyll fluorometer (Seapoint), transmissometer 
(WET Labs), altimeter (Tritech), reference temperature (SBE35RT), LADCP (RDI) 
and 3 chipods (JFE). 

The CTD was mounted vertically in an SBE CTD cage attached to the bottom of the 
rosette frame and located to one side of the carousel. The SBE4C conductivity, 
SBE3plus temperature and SBE43 Dissolved oxygen sensors and their respective 
pumps and tubing were mounted vertically in the CTD cage, as recommended by SBE. 
Pump exhausts were attached to the CTD cage on the side opposite from the 
sensors and directed downward. The transmissometer was mounted horizontally, and 
the fluorometer was mounted vertically near the bottom of the rosette frame. The 
altimeter was mounted on the inside of the bottom frame ring. The 150 KHz 
downward-looking Broadband LADCP (RDI) was mounted vertically on one side of the 
frame between the bottles and the CTD. Its battery pack was located on the 
opposite side of the frame, mounted on the bottom of the frame. The two upward 
facing chipods were mounted to the top of the rosette opposite one another. The 
one downward facing chipod was mounted to the LEFT side of the downward facing 
LADCP. A chipod pressure-case was mounted next to the downward facing chipod 
containing the memory storage and battery pack. Rosette images are featured at 
in the appendix section of the report. Table 2.1.0 shows height of the sensors 
referenced to the bottom of the frame: 


Table 2.1.0: Heights referenced to bottom of rosette frame 

         Instrument                                     Height in cm 
         ---------------------------------------------  ------------
         Pressure Sensor, inlet to capillary tube            20 
         Temperature (probe tip at TC duct inlet)            10 
         SBE35RT(centered between T1/T2 on same plane)       15 
         Rinko DO                                            20 
         Transmissometer                                     10.5 
         Fluorometer                                         11.5 
         Altimeter                                           10 
         LADCP (downward paddle center)                      10.5 
         LADCP (upward paddle center)                       188 
         chipod (downward facing)                             3.5 
         chipod (upward A facing)                           213 
         chipod (upward B facing)                           213 
         Outer-ring (odd #s) bottle centerline              122 
         Inner-ring (even #s) bottle centerline             112 
         Reference (Surface Zero tape on wire)              262 


The rosette system was suspended from a UNOLS-standard three-conductor 0.322" 
electro-mechanical sea cable. The sea cable was terminated at the beginning of 
P16S. On station 02 weather events and swells caused a low tension event near 
recovery resulting in a "bird-nested" wire about 15m above package. A re-
termination was performed after sampling. 

The RVIB Nathaniel B. Palmer's Markey DESH-5 (starboard Baltic room) winch 
was used for the first 38 station casts. At the bottom of station cast 031/01 
Meghan King, the MT on duty in the Baltic room, noted the exposed outer wire on 
the winch-drum appeared to have broken or rusted strands. It was later 
determined the wire was in had not been damaged during the current cruise. ODF 
electronic technician, John Calderwood, and the ACS deck group agreed 
rosette/CTD/LADCP/chipod operations would not exceed 4031m wire-out with damaged 
wire. Stations 31-38 were carried out at most approximately 900m short of the 
multibeam reported bottom depth. After station 38, optimal weather, swell and 
wind speed allowed for the package to be transferred to outside winch to 
complete full profile casts under the starboard A-frame. 

Stations 39-90 were completed from Markey DESH-5.5 dual-drum (01 starboard A-
frame) winch. Station cast 039/01 was canceled at 300m wire-out after 300 plus 
missed frames. The package was recovered and winch wire was re-terminated after 
cast. Station cast 039/02 was terminated after 800m and 700 plus missed frames. 
Package was recovered and the Markey DESH-5.5 dual-drum (01 starboard A-frame) 
winch slip-ring was replaced with the Markey DESH-5 (starboard Baltic room) 
winch slip-ring. Station cast 039/03 signal was improved enough to complete with 
winch speed held at 30mpm down-cast and 60mpm on up-cast. George Aukon, ASC 
Electronics Technician, cleaned slip-ring housing, removed extraneous wiring, 
replaced ground-wire and electrically re- terminated the package. Stations 40-90 
continued with a clean signal and without incident using the Markey DESH-5.5 
dual-drum (01 starboard A-frame) winch. 

The deck watch prepared the rosette 20-30 minutes prior to each cast. The 
bottles were cocked and all valves, vents and lanyards were checked for proper 
orientation. Once stopped on station, and the bridge and deck were ready for 
deployment, the CTD was powered-up and the data acquisition system started from 
the computer lab. The rosette was unstrapped from the deck and syringes were 
removed from CTD intake ports. The winch operator was directed by the USAP 
marine technician (MT) to raise the package. 

The rosette deployments took place by either extending the Baltic room squirt-
boom or the starboard A-frame outboard and lowering the package quickly into the 
water. The package was lowered to 10-20 meters depending on position and 
turbidity of water from the bowthruster. Once the console operator determined 
that the sensor pumps had turned on and the sensors were stable, the MT was 
notified and then directed the winch operator to bring the package back to the 
surface. At the surface, the wire-out reading was re-zeroed before descent. 

Most rosette casts were lowered to within 10 meters of the bottom, using the CTD 
depth multibeam echosounder depth to estimate the distance, and the altimeter 
and wire-out to direct the final approach. Stations 31-38 were held at 4031m 
wire-out to prevent the compromised wire from parting and losing the package. 

For each up-cast, the winch operator was directed to stop the winch at up to 36 
predetermined sampling depths. These standard depths were staggered every 
station using 3 sampling schemes. To ensure package shed wake had dissipated, the 
CTD console operator waited 30 seconds prior to tripping sample bottles. An 
additional 10 seconds elapsed before moving to the next consecutive trip depth, 
to allow the SBE35RTtime to take its readings. The MT directed the package to the 
surface for the last bottle trip. 

Recovering the package at the end of the deployment was essentially the reverse 
of launching, with the MT directing the winch operator to maneuver the package 
inboard. The rosette was secured on the deck for sampling. The bottles and 
rosette were examined before samples were taken, and anything unusual was noted 
on the sample log. 

Each bottle on the rosette had a unique serial number, independent of the bottle 
position on the rosette. Sampling for specific programs was outlined on sample 
log sheets prior to cast recovery or at the time of collection. Routine CTD 
maintenance included soaking the conductivity and oxygen sensors with fresh 
deionized water between casts as well as once every 10-20 casts with 1% Triton-X 
solution to maintain sensor stability and eliminate accumulated bio-films. 
Rosette maintenance was performed on a regular basis. Valves and o-rings were 
inspected for leaks. The rosette, CTD and carousel were rinsed with fresh water 
as part of the routine maintenance. 


2.2.  Navigation and Bathymetry 

Data Acquisition Navigation data were acquired at 1-second intervals from the 
ship's Seapath 330 GPS located on the forward bow mast. Navigation was recorded 
with a Linux system beginning 20 March 2014 at 0350z, as the RVIB Nathaniel B. 
Palmer left the dock in Hobart, Tasmania, AUS. It was noted by Steve Howell that 
the Seapath 330 was ˜23m from the ship's Trimble 20636-00SM navigation used by 
the LADCP for GPS data located in the center mast of the ship. 

Center-beam bathymetric and hull-depth correction data from the KongsbergEM-122 
multibeam echosounder system were acquired by the ship, and fed into the ODF 
Linux systems through a serial data feed. The ships hull offset of 7.3m was 
applied to all multibeam data. Bathymetry and navigation data were merged and 
stored on the ODF systems, and data were made available as displays on the ODF 
acquisition system during casts. Bottom depths associated with rosette casts 
were recorded on the Console Logs during deployments. 

Multibeam malfunctioned a number of times during the cruise. Extended use of 
bow thruster on station caused the multibeam to report erratically in most 
cases. The ship's secondary Seapath failed at the beginning of station 27 until 
just after bottom of cast. On station 86 the multibeam settings were out of 
range resulting in readings reported 1000m deeper than CTD depth at bottom of 
cast. If otherwise not resolved, bathymetry signal loss around cast events were 
stored as -999 in the system database. 

Corrected multibeam center depths are reported for each cast event in the WOCE 
and Exchange format files. 


2.3. CTD Data Acquisition and Rosette Operation 

The CTD data acquisition system consisted of an SBE-11plus (V2) deck unit and 
four networked generic PC workstations running CentOS-5.10 Linux. The systems 
each had a Comtrol Rocketport PCI multiple port serial controller providing 8 
additional RS-232 ports. The systems were interconnected through the 
ship's network. These systems were available for real-time operational and CTD 
data displays, and provided for CTD and hydrographic data management. 

One of the workstations was designated the CTD console and was connected to the 
CTD deck unit via RS-232. The CTD console provided an interface and operational 
displays for controlling and monitoring a CTD deployment and closing bottles on 
the rosette. Another of the workstations was designated the website and database 
server and maintained the hydrographic database for P16S. Redundant backups were 
managed automatically. 

The SBE9plus CTD supplied a standard SBE-format data stream at a data rate of 24 
frames/second. The sensors and instruments used during US-Repeat Hydrography(GO-
SHIP) P16S, along with pre-cruise laboratory calibration information, are listed 
below in Table 2.3.0. Copies of the pre-cruise calibration sheets for various 
sensors are included in Appendix 2.D. 


Table 2.3.0:  US-Repeat Hydrography(GO-SHIP) P16S Rosette Underwater 
              Electronics. 

                                              Serial         CTD      Stations  Pre-Cruise Calibration
Instrument/Sensor*       Mfr.§/Model          Number         Channel  Used         Date      Facility§ 
-----------------------  -------------------  -------------  -------  -----     -----------  ---------
Carousel Water Sampler   SBE32 (36-place)     3213290-0113            1-90    
Reference Temperature    SBE35                3528706-0035            1-90      15-Jan-2014  SIO/STS 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CTD                      SBE9plus SIO         09P41717-0831           1-90      
Pressure                 Paroscientific       99677          Freq.2   1-90      02-Jan-2014  SIO/STS 
                         Digiquartz 401K-105                                    
                                                                                
Primary Pump Circuit                                                            
  Temperature (T1)       SBE3plus             03P-5046       Freq.0   1-14      07-Jan-2014  SIO/STS 
  Temperature (T1)       SBE3plus             03P-4953       Freq.0   15-90     07-Jan-2014  SIO/STS 
  Conductivity (C1)      SBE4C                04-3429        Freq.1   1-90      19-Nov-2013  SBE 
  Dissolved Oxygen       SBE43                43-1138        Aux2/V2  1-34      07-Dec-2013  SBE 
  Dissolved Oxygen       SBE43                43-0185        Aux2/V2  35        07-Dec-2013  SBE 
                                                                                
Secondary Pump Circuit                                                          
  Temperature (T2)       SBE3plus             03P-4953       Freq.3   1-14      07-Jan-2014  SIO/STS 
  Temperature (T2)       SBE3plus             03P-5046       Freq.3   15-27     24-Jan-2013  SIO/STS 
  Temperature (T2)       SBE3plus             03P-4213       Freq.3   28-90     02-Jan-2014  SIO/STS 
  Conductivity (C2)      SBE4C                04-3057        Freq.4   1-14      19-Dec-2013  SBE 
  Conductivity (C2)      SBE4C                04-2115        Freq.4   15-90     14-Dec-2013  SBE 
  Dissolved Oxygen       SBE43                43-0185        Aux2/V2  36-85     07-Dec-2013  SBE 
  Dissolved Oxygen       SBE43                43-1071        Aux2/V2  85-90     19-Dec-2013  SBE 
                                                                                
Chlorophyll Fluorometer  Seapoint             SCF2748        Aux1/V0  1-90                   Seapoint 
                                                                                
Transmissometer (TAMU)   WET Labs C-Star      CST-1636DR     Aux1/V1  1-90      08-Oct-2013  WET Labs 
                                                                                              
Altimeter (200m range)   Tritech LPA200       221666         Aux3/V4  1                      Tritech 
Altimeter (200m range)   Tritech LPA200       244480         Aux3/V4  2-90                   Tritech
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Deck Unit (NBP)          SBE11plus V2         11P47914-0768           1-90                   SBE 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    *All sensors belong to SIO/STS, unless otherwise noted. 
    §SBE = Sea-Bird Electronics 


An SBE35RT reference temperature sensor was connected to the SBE32 carousel and 
recorded a temperature for each bottle closure. These temperatures were used as 
additional CTD calibration checks. The SBE35RT was utilized using Sea-Bird 
Electronics' recommendations (http://www.seabird.com). 

The SBE9plus CTD was connected to the SBE32 36-place carousel, providing for sea 
cable operation. Power to the SBE9plus CTD and sensors, SBE32 carousel and 
Simrad altimeter was provided through the sea cable from the SIO/STS SBE11plus 
deck unit in the main lab. 

CTD deployments were initiated by the console watch after the ship stopped on 
station. The acquisition program was started and the deck unit turned on at least 
3 minutes prior to package deployment. The watch maintained a console operations 
log containing a description of each deployment, a record of every attempt to 
close a bottle and any relevant comments. The deployment and acquisition software 
presented a short dialog instructing the operator to turn on the deck unit, to 
examine the on-screen CTD data displays and to notify the deck watch that this 
was accomplished. 

Once the deck watch had deployed the rosette, the winch operator lowered it to 
10 meters, or deeper in heavier seas. The CTD sensor pumps were configured with 
a 5-second start-up delay after detecting seawater conductivities. The console 
operator checked the CTD data for proper sensor operation and waited for sensors 
to stabilize, then instructed the winch operator to bring the package to the 
surface and descend to a specified target depth, based on CTD pressure available 
on the winch display. 

The CTD profiling rate was at most 30m/min to 100m and up to 60m/min deeper than 
100m, depending on sea cable tension and sea state. As the package descended 
toward the target depth, the rate was reduced to 40m/min at 100m from the bottom 
and again to 20m/min at 50m from the bottom. 

The progress of the deployment and CTD data quality were monitored through 
interactive graphics and operational displays. Bottle trip locations were 
transcribed onto the console and sample logs. The sample log was used later as 
an inventory of samples drawn from the bottles. The altimeter channel, CTD 
depth, winch wire-out and bathymetric depth were all monitored to determine the 
distance of the package from the bottom, allowing a safe approach to 8-10 
meters. A bottom contact switch was attached to the CTD as an additional safety 
measure requested by the USAP team. 

Bottles were closed on the up-cast by operating an on-screen control. The 
expected CTD pressure was reported to the winch operator for every bottle trip. 
Bottles were tripped 30-40 seconds after the package stopped to allow the rosette 
wake to dissipate and the bottles to flush. The winch operator was instructed to 
proceed to the next bottle stop no sooner than 10 seconds after closing bottles 
to ensure that stable CTD data were associated with the trip and to allow the 
SBE35RT temperature sensor to measure bottle trip temperature. 

It was necessary at some stations in higher sea states to close shallower 
bottles (normally only the shallowest bottle) "on the fly" due to the need to 
keep tension on the CTD cable. Such closures were always noted on the CTD 
Console Log Sheet. 

The package was directed to the surface by the deck for the last bottle closure, 
then the package was brought on deck. The console operator terminated the data 
acquisition, turned off the deck unit after SBE35 data had been recovered and 
assisted with rosette sampling. 


2.4.  CTD Cable Tension on Deep Casts 

As US-Repeat Hydrography(GO-SHIP) P16S progressed into deeper and deeper 
water, significant science operations issues hinged on actual CTD cable tension 
and cast time performance on very deep CTD casts (maximum cast depths deeper 
than 5000 meters). Although all the U.S. work for this program since it 
beganin2003 had transpired without CTD cable parting or functionality loss, 
new UNOLS/NSF cable tension rules went into effect shortly before this cruise. It 
was thought pre-cruise, by some at the operator and agency level, that the 
maximum CTD cable tensions on deep casts on this cruise would exceed the 
new rules. Two questions in particular loomed in planning: (1) under what 
conditions would CTD cable tensions exceed 5000 lbs., and (2) what would be the 
impacts on P16S station times and operations due to efforts to keep maximum 
observed CTD cable tension less than 5000 lbs.? The cruise had a 
waiver permitting CTD operations to continue under some conditions if higher CTD 
cable tensions were observed, but there was general concurrence that sustained 
P16S CTD operations with cable tensions above 5000 lbs. should be avoided if 
possible. 

All precautions taken to adhere to "Appendix B: UNOLS Overboard Handling Systems 
Design Standards" by ACS and the science party. It is important to note that most 
5000-6000 meter casts during P16S took place in good weather (winds 10-20 knots; 
low swell) and at all times all precautions were observed to maintain winch wire 
safety practices. That being said, tension spikes were noted under unusual 
circumstances. On station cast 010/01 a tension spike of 6965 lbs was recorded just 
before recovery of the package at about 9m wire out. Sea state and ship motion 
did not explain the relatively high tension spike near the surface. Wire-out and 
angle of package with swell, documented damage to one of the upward-facing 
chipods and a slightly bent rosette indicate contact with the ship may have 
caused this particular tension spike. In addition, during the first 38 station 
casts, increased ship motion normally associated with high tension events, there 
were several casts where cable tensions approached 5000 lbs but did not exceed 
5000 lbs. While on the Markey DESH-5 (starboard Baltic room) winch , under high 
sea state conditions winch speeds were held at 20 meters per minute until well 
over500m and 40 meters per minute until well over1000m depth. However, under 
similar conditions with maximum cable deployed and despite lower haul-up speeds, 
the tension(s) reported by the Markey DESH-5.5 dual-drum (01 starboard A-frame) 
winch to regularly exceeded 5000lbs. Tension readings from the package during 
recovery also indicated that the calibration for the Markey DESH-5.5 dual-drum 
(01 starboard A-frame) winch was not accurate. In such circumstances excessive 
tensions were unavoidable despite best efforts. 


2.5. CTD Data Processing 

Shipboard CTD data processing was performed automatically during and after each 
deployment using SIO/STS CTD processing software v.5.1.6. 

During acquisition, the raw CTD data were converted to engineering units, 
filtered, response-corrected, calibrated and decimated to a more manageable 0.5-
second time series. Pre-cruise laboratory calibrations for pressure, temperature 
and conductivity were also applied at this time. The 0.5-second time series data 
were used for real-time graphics during deployments, and were the source for CTD 
pressure and temperature data associated with each rosette bottle. Both the 
raw 24Hz data and the 0.5-second time series were stored for subsequent 
processing. During the deployment, the raw data were backed up to another Linux 
workstation every 5 minutes. 

At the completion of a deployment a sequence of processing steps was performed 
automatically. The 0.5-second time series data were checked for consistency, 
clean sensor response and calibration shifts. A 2-decibar pressure series was 
generated from the down cast data. The pressure-series data were used by the web 
service for parameter plots, sections and CTD data distribution. Time-series 
data were also available for distribution through the website. 

CTD data were routinely examined for sensor problems, calibration shifts and 
deployment or operational problems. On-deck pressure values were monitored at 
the start and end of each cast for potential drift. Alignment of temperature and 
conductivity sensor data (in addition to the default 0.073-second conductivity 
"advance" applied by the SBE11plus deck unit) was optimized for each pump/sensor 
combination to minimize salinity spiking, using data from multiple casts of 
various depths after acquisition. If the pressure offset or conductivity 
"advance" values were altered after data acquisition, the CTD data were re-
averaged from the 24Hz stored data. 

The primary and secondary temperature sensors (SBE3plus)were compared to each 
other and to the SBE35 temperature sensor. CTD conductivity sensors (SBE4C) were 
compared to each other, then calibrated by examining differences between CTD and 
check-sample conductivity values. CTD dissolved oxygen sensor data were 
calibrated to check-sample data. 

As bottle salinity and oxygen results became available, they were used to refine 
shipboard conductivity and oxygen sensor calibrations. Theta-Salinity and theta-
O2 comparisons were made between down and up casts as well as between groups of 
adjacent deployments. 

A total of 90 casts were made using the 36-place rosette/CTD/LADCP/chipod 
rosette. Further elaboration of CTD procedures specific to this cruise are found 
in the next section. 


2.6.  CTD Acquisition and Data Processing Details 

Sta/Cast  Comment 

Start     Full (electrical + mechanical) retermination of both wires. 
--------  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
1/2       No test cast. Altimeter did not come on. Pumps were not operating 
          until 3200db.Primary conductivity signal reading -9 until 
          3200db.Bottle 35 tripped out of the water. After cast replaced primary 
          conductivity cable, secondary pump and altimeter. Knudsen and multibeam 
          are unstable due to bowthruster holding station. Signal drops skewed 
          data which required fitting temperature and conductivity specific to 
          this station. Used secondary sensors for reporting. Numerous pump 
          shut-offs during upcast affected oxygen signal, very noisy. 

4/2       Bottom contact switch interferes with pump status on deck. Once 
          package was lifted off-deck pump status on deck-unit read 0010. 
          Package came partially out of water at start of cast. Conductivity 
          stabilized late on down cast. Chose start time that coincides with 
          approximately 12db. 

5/3       Primary temperature cut out at 2836-2834db on upcast. Replaced primary 
          temperature cable after cast. Signal drops skewed data which required 
          fitting temperature and conductivity specific to this station. Used 
          secondary sensors for reporting. 

10/1      Poor weather conditions, high seas state caused deployment tensions 
          near 0. On recovery tensions spiked to 6965lbs. Proximity to ship, 
          wire out 9m, lack of ship heave or roll to cause such a spike indicate 
          the package may have hit the ship. This caused a change in winch 
          protocol. MTs direct surface deployment to 10m or 20m. In high seas 
          package will not come to surface for start of cast. Interpolating best 
          near surface value to surface. 

13/1      Down casts started at 9.4m due to poor weather condition (wind speed & 
          swell). Surface bottle at 5db will not match up with downcast. Advised 
          co-chief, start of downcast should be where we trip last bottle. 

14/1      Replaced secondary conductivity after cast due to large drift. Swapped 
          more stable secondary temperature for primary temperature. 

15/1      Station casts 15-21 TC duct disconnected from primary line. Noisy high 
          gradient region in primary sensors used secondary sensors for 
          reporting. 

20/1      Improved sea state allows surface start of cast. 

21/1      TC duct found disconnected on primary sensors. Replaced screw that held 
          TC duct in place. Secondary sensors used in reporting for stations 15-21. 

25/1      Bottom contact switch was replaced. Appears to be operating correctly 
          now. Deck-unit turned off before SBE35 data could finish writing file. 
          Next cast overwrote last 12 bottle trips SBE35 data. 

26/1      Secondary sensors dropped out from 900-1960db upcast. Temperature 
          cable replaced after cast. 

27/1      Secondary sensors dropped out from 730-2140db upcast. Replaced primary 
          temperature sensor after cast. Multibeam dropped out from beginning of 
          cast until just after bottom approach. 

31/1      ASC MT noted broken wire strands on winch wire at approximately 4100m 
          wire out. 

32/1      Station casts 32-38 stopped at 4031m wire-out. 

33/1      Winch LCI90 screen stopped working at 1800m. Continued down to 660m 
          then came to full stop. LCI90 restarted and cast continued. On 
          downcast spiking was noted again in primary sigma theta and salinity. 
          Replaced primary pump after cast. Used secondary sensors for 
          reporting. 

34/1      Up-cast O2 and salinity signals very noisy on primary plumb line. 
          Sensors back to normal by 2650db. Secondary good. Used secondary 
          sensors for reporting. Flushed plumb lines with Triton-X, replaced 
          pump cable and oxygen cable after cast. 

35/1      O2 sensor looks bad beyond 3500m on down cast. O2 and primary good 
          signal from 2800m upcast to surface. Sensors back to normal by 
          2650db.Secondary good. Used secondary sensors for reporting. 

36/1      Replaced oxygen sensor and cable before cast. Downcast O2 and primary 
          clean signal. Upcast very noisy. Spiking has stopped. 

37/1      Moved O2 sensor to secondary plumb line and replaced primary pump. 
          Signal improved both up and down cast. Moved secondary sensors to 
          primary reporting signal. 

39/1      Moved Rosette out of Baltic room to starboard A-frame. Using waterfall 
          winch instead of Baltic room winch. Initial cast lost around 300 
          frames in 300m. Canceled cast and recovered package. Cut off some wire 
          and reterminated package after cast. Cast not reported. 

39/2      600 frames lost in 350m. Canceled cast and recovered package. Replaced 
          slip-ring with Baltic-room-winch slip-ring. 

39/3      Missed frames started at about 500m and continued through out cast. 
          Not as many as on first 2 casts. Frames missed increased as winch speed 
          increased. Resulting in the downcast carried out at 30m/min and upcast 
          at increased speeds. All bottle stops observed for good data. Used 
          primary sensor for reporting this cast. Signal drops skewed data which 
          required fitting temperature and conductivity specific to this 
          station. Sampling outside after package repositioned under starboard 
          a-frame. Heavy rain and wind noted for outside sampling under tarp. 

40/2      Before cast re-termination, removed extraneous wires from slip-ring 
          housing, checked/fixed grounding, cleaned slip-ring, and fixed meter 
          wheel. 

79/1      88 missed frames on down-cast. Signals despiked and coded. 

80/3      388 missed frames from 1200db to bottom of cast. Package wire re-
          terminated after cast. Signals despiked and coded. 

85/1      Odd SBE43 DO sensor trace. Replaced sensor and cable after cast. 


2.7.  CTD Sensor Laboratory Calibrations 

Laboratory calibrations of the CTD pressure, temperature, conductivity and 
dissolved oxygen sensors were performed prior to US-Repeat Hydrography(GO-SHIP) 
P16S. The sensors and calibration dates are listed in Table 2.3.0. Copies of the 
calibration sheets for Pressure, Temperature, Conductivity, and Dissolved Oxygen 
sensors, as well as factory and deck calibrations for the TAMU 
Transmissometer, are in Appendix 2.D. 


2.8.  CTD Shipboard Calibration Procedures 

One SBE9plus CTD was used for all rosette/CTD/LADCP/chipod casts during US-
Repeat Hydrography(GO-SHIP) P16S: S/N 831. The CTDs were deployed with all 
sensors and pumps aligned vertically, as recommended by SBE. 

The SBE35RTDigital Reversing Thermometer (S/N 3528706-0035) served as an 
independent calibration check for T1 and T2 sensors. In situ salinity and 
dissolved O2 check samples collected during each cast were used to calibrate the 
conductivity and dissolved O2 sensors. 

2.8.1. CTD Pressure 

The Paroscientific Digiquartz pressure transducer (S/N 831-99677) was calibrated 
in Jan 2014 at the SIO/STS Calibration Facility. The calibration coefficients 
provided on the reports were used to convert frequencies to pressure. The 
SIO/STS pressure calibration coefficients already incorporate the slope and 
offset term usually provided by Paroscientific. 

The initial deck readings for pressure indicated a pressure offset was needed, 
typically because CTDs are calibrated horizontally but deployed vertically. The 
optimal offset was found to be -0.2 decibars. Residual pressure offsets (the 
difference between the first and last submerged pressures, after the offset 
corrections) varied from -0.4 to 0.0 decibars. Pre- and post-cast on-deck/out-
of-water pressure offsets varied from 0.7 to 0.0 decibars before the casts, and 
0.6 to 0.0 decibars after the casts. The in/out pressures within a cast were 
very consistent. 

2.8.2. CTD Temperature 

Two temperature sensor changes were made through out P16S. After the first 14 
stations, the primary SBE3plus temperature sensor (T1: 03P-5046) was traded with 
the secondary temperature sensor (T2: 03P-4953). The secondary sensor was 
replaced once again after station 27 with (T2: 03P-4213). Calibration 
coefficients derived from the pre-cruise calibrations, plus shipboard temperature 
corrections determined during the cruise, were applied to raw primary and 
secondary sensor data during each cast. 

A single SBE35RT(3528706-0035) was used as a tertiary temperature check. It was 
located equidistant between T1 and T2 with the sensing element aligned in a 
plane with the T1 and T2 sensing elements. The SBE35RT Digital Reversing 
Thermometer is an internally-recording temperature sensor that operates 
independently of the CTD. It is triggered by the SBE32 carousel in response to a 
bottle closure. According to the manufacturer's specifications, the typical 
stability is 0.001°C/year. The SBE35RT on P16S was set to internally average 
over 5 sampling cycles (a total of 6.6 seconds). 

Two independent metrics of calibration accuracy were examined. At each bottle 
closure, the primary and secondary temperature were compared with each other and 
with the SBE 35RT temperatures. Temperature sensors were first examined for drift 
with time, using the more stable SBE35RT at a smaller range of deeper trip levels 
(2000-5000 decibars). 

Station 1, the pumps shut off on the downcast; this skewed temperatures and 
required an independent fit for T1 and T2. Similar circumstances occurred on 
station 5. Both station 1 and 5 have the same initial second order fit with 
respect to pressure, before they were incorporated with other stations for an 
over-all fit. The replacement of temperature sensors and plumbing circulatory 
issues required alternating primary and secondary sensors for reporting. 
Therefore the temperature sensors were grouped as follows for fitting purposes: 
Stations 1-14, 15-21, 22-27, 28-32 and 33-90. A second order fit with respect to 
pressure and a first order fit with respect to temperature were applied to each 
station grouping in both T1 and T2. Finally, a time-dependent drifts in 
temperature sensors were noted and corrected for deep-data (2000-5000 decibars) 
in all stations. 

The final corrections for T1 temperature data reported on P16S are summarized in 
Appendix A. Corrections made to both temperatures had the form: 

                 T      = T + tp2 * P2 + tp1 * P + t1 * T + t0  
                  ITS90

Residual temperature differences after correction are shown in figures 2.8.2.0 through 2.8.2.8. 


Figure 2.8.2.0: SBE35RT-T1 by pressure (-0.01°C≤T1 - T2≤0.01°C). 
Figure 2.8.2.1: SBE35RT-T2 by pressure (-0.01°C≤T1 - T2≤0.01°C). 
Figure 2.8.2.2: T1-T2 by pressure (-0.01°C≤T1 - T2≤0.01°C).
Figure 2.8.2.3: SBE35RT-T1 by station (-0.01°C≤T1 - T2≤0.01°C). 
Figure 2.8.2.4: Deep SBE35RT-T1 by station (Pressure >= 1800 dbars). 
Figure 2.8.2.5: SBE35RT-T2 by station (-0.01°C≤T1 - T2≤0.01°C).
Figure 2.8.2.6: Deep SBE35RT-T2 by station (Pressure >= 1800 dbars). 
Figure 2.8.2.7: T1-T2 by station (-0.01°C≤T1 - T2≤0.01°C). 
Figure 2.8.2.8: Deep T1-T2 by station (Pressure >= 1800 dbars). 


The 95% confidence limit for deep temperature residuals (where pressure > 1800 
db) is ±0.000788°C with a standard deviation of ±0.000402°C for SBE35RT-T1 and 
±0.000615°C with a standard deviation of ±0.000313°C for T1-T2.

2.8.3.  CTD Conductivity 

A single SBE4C primary conductivity sensor (C1/04-3429) and two secondary 
conductivity sensors were used during P16S. Stations 1-14 the secondary sensor 
was C2:04-3057 and stations 15-90 C2:04-2155. Calibration coefficients derived 
from the pre-cruise calibrations were applied to convert raw frequencies to 
conductivity. Shipboard conductivity corrections, determined during the cruise, 
were applied to primary and secondary conductivity data for each cast. 

Corrections for both CTD temperature sensors were finalized before analyzing 
conductivity differences. Two independent metrics of calibration accuracy were 
examined. At each bottle closure, the primary and secondary conductivity were 
compared with each other. Each sensor was also compared to conductivity 
calculated from check sample salinities using CTD pressure and temperature. 

The differences between primary and secondary temperature sensors were used as 
filtering criteria for all conductivity fits to reduce the contamination of 
conductivity comparisons by package wake. The coherence of this relationship is 
shown in figure 2.8.3.0. 


Figure 2.8.3.0: Coherence of conductivity differences as a function of 
                temperature differences. 

Uncorrected conductivity comparisons are shown in figures 2.8.3.1 through 2.8.3.3. 

Figure 2.8.3.1: Uncorrected CBottle - C1 by station (-0.01°C≤T1 - T2≤0.01°C).
Figure 2.8.3.2: Uncorrected CBottle - C2 by station (-0.01°C≤T1 - T2≤0.01°C). 
Figure 2.8.3.3: Uncorrected C1 - C2 by station (-0.01°C≤T1 - T2≤0.01°C). 


Offsets for each C sensor were evaluated for drift with time using CBottle - 
CCTD differences from deeper pressures (more than 1800 decibars). C1 and both C2 
offsets had a steady, slow shift with time 

On station 1 the pumps shut off on the downcast which skewed temperatures and 
conductivity. Similar circumstances occurred on station 5. Both station 1 and 5 
have the same initial second order fit with respect to pressure. After which 
both stations 1 and 5 were incorporated with other stations for an over-all fit. 
The replacement of conductivity sensors and plumbing circulatory issues required 
alternating primary and secondary sensors for reporting. Therefore the 
conductivity sensors were grouped as follows for fitting purposes: Stations 1-
14, 15-21, 22-27, 28-32 and 33-90. A second order fit with respect to pressure 
was applied to each station grouping. Second order fit with respect to 
temperature was applied to stations 2-4, 6-14 and 33-90. A first order fit with 
respect to temperature only was applied to C1 and C2 for stations 15-21. A 
second order fit with respect to conductivity was applied to stations 33-90. 
First order fit with respect to conductivity only was applied to C1 and C2 for 
stations 2-4, 6-21. Finally, a time-dependent drifts in conductivity sensors 
were noted and corrected for deep- data (2000-5000 decibars) for all stations. 

The residual conductivity differences after correction are shown in figures 
2.8.3.4 through 2.8.3.15.


Figure 2.8.3.4: Corrected CBottle - C1 by station (-0.01°C≤T1 - T2≤0.01°C). 
Figure 2.8.3.5: Deep Corrected CBottle - C1 by station (Pressure >= 1800 dbars). 
Figure 2.8.3.6: Corrected CBottle - C2 by station (-0.01°C≤T1 - T2≤0.01°C).
Figure 2.8.3.7: Deep Corrected CBottle - C2 by station (Pressure >= 1800 dbars). 
Figure 2.8.3.8: Corrected C1 - C2 by station (-0.01°C≤T1 - T2≤0.01°C). 
Figure 2.8.3.9: Deep Corrected C1 - C2 by station (Pressure >= 1800 dbars).
Figure 2.8.3.10: Corrected CBottle - C1 by pressure (-0.01°C≤T1 - T2≤0.01°C). 
Figure 2.8.3.11: Corrected CBottle - C2 by pressure (-0.01°C≤T1 - T2≤0.01°C). 
Figure 2.8.3.12: Corrected C1 - C2 by pressure (-0.01°C≤T1 - T2≤0.01°C).
Figure 2.8.3.13: Corrected CBottle - C1 by conductivity (-0.01°C≤T1 - T2≤0.01°C). 
Figure 2.8.3.14: Corrected CBottle - C2 by conductivity (-0.01°C≤T1 - T2≤0.01°C). 
Figure 2.8.3.15: Corrected C1 - C2 by conductivity (-0.01°C≤T1 - T2≤0.01°C).


The final corrections for the sensors used on P16S are detailed in Appendix A. 
Corrections made to each conductivity sensor had the form: 

  Ccor = C + cp2 * P2 + cp1 * P + ct 2* T2 + ct 1* T + c2 * C2 + c1 * C + c0 

Salinity residuals after applying shipboard P/T/C corrections are summarized in 
figures 2.8.3.16 through 2.8.3.18. Only CTD and bottle salinity data with 
"acceptable" quality codes are included in the differences. 


Figure 2.8.3.16: Salinity residuals by station (-0.01°C£T1 - T2£0.01°C). 
Figure 2.8.3.17: Salinity residuals by pressure (-0.01°C£T1 - T2£0.01°C).
Figure 2.8.3.18: Deep Salinity residuals by station (Pressure >= 1800 dbars). 


Figures 2.8.3.17 and 2.8.3.18 represent estimates of the salinity accuracy and 
precision of P16S. The 95% confidence limits are ±0.00125 PSU with a standard 
deviation of ±0.000616 PSU relative to bottle salinities for deep salinities, 
where pressure is more than 1800 decibars. 

2.8.4.  CTD Dissolved Oxygen 

Three SBE43 dissolved O2 sensors (DO/43-1138 for stations 1-35, DO/43-0185 for 
stations 36-85, and DO/43-1071 for stations 86-90) were used during P16S. The 
dissolved O2 sensor was plumbed into the primary T1/C1 pump circuit after C1 for 
stations 1-36, and into the secondary T2/C2 pump circuit after C2 for stations 
37-90. 

Pressure-series data were fit for stations 1-35, and time-series down and up 
cast data were used together for stations 36-90 to determine the fits. Time-
series fitting is a more recent addition to fitting options for the program. 
Only station 1 was an up cast pressure-series; the rest were down casts. 

The SBE43 DO sensors were calibrated to dissolved O2 bottle samples taken at 
bottle stops by matching the down cast CTD data to the up cast trip locations on 
isopycnal surfaces, then calculating CTD dissolved O2 using a DO sensor response 
model and minimizing the residual differences from the bottle samples. A non-
linear least-squares fitting procedure was used to minimize the residuals and to 
determine sensor model coefficients, and was accomplished in three stages. 

The time constants for the lagged terms in the model were first determined for 
the sensors. These time constants can be sensor-specific; but the same ones were 
used for each sensor on this cruise. Next, casts were fit individually to bottle 
sample data. Consecutive casts were compared on plots of Theta vs. O2 to verify 
consistency over the course of P16S. 

At the end of the cruise, standard and blank values for bottle oxygen data were 
smoothed for stations 1-67, and the bottle oxygen values were recalculated. 
Stations 68-90 bottle oxygens were intentionally not smoothed due to a 5+°C 
change over the last few days of the cruise. The changes to bottle oxygen values 
were less than 0.01 ml/l for most stations. CTD O2 data were re-calibrated to 
the smoothed bottle values at the end of the cruise, but only where the bottle 
values changed by more than 0.005 ml/l. 

Final CTD dissolved O2 residuals are shown in figures 2.8.4.0 - 2.8.4.2. 


Figure 2.8.4.0: O2 residuals by station (-0.01°C≤T1 - T2≤0.01°C). 
Figure 2.8.4.1: O2 residuals by pressure (-0.01°C≤T1 - T2≤0.01°C). 
Figure 2.8.4.2: Deep O2 residuals by station (Pressure >= 1800 dbars). 


The standard deviations of 1.779 m mol/kg for all oxygens and 0.441 m mol/kg for 
deep oxygens are only presented as general indicators of goodness of fit. 
SIO/STS makes no claims regarding the precision or accuracy of CTD dissolved O2 
data.

The general form of the SIO/STS DO sensor response model equation for Clark-
style cells follows Brown and Morrison [Brow78], Millard [Mill82] and Owens & 
Millard [Owen85]. SIO/STS models DO sensor responses with lagged CTD data. In 
situ pressure and temperature are filtered to match the sensor responses. Time 
constants for the pressure response (tp), a slow (tTf)and fast (tTs) thermal 
response, package velocity (tdP), thermal diffusion (tdT) and pressure 
hysteresis (th) are fitting parameters. Once determined for a given sensor, these 
time constants typically remain constant for a cruise. The thermal diffusion 
term is derived by low-pass filtering the difference between the short response 
(Ts)and long response (Tl) temperatures. This term is intended to correct non-
linearity in sensor response introduced by inappropriate analog thermal 
compensation. Package velocity is approximated by low-pass filtering 1st-order 
pressure differences, and is intended to correct flow-dependent response. 
Dissolved O2 concentration is then calculated: 

                        Ph                                               dOc    dP
                   (C2•----)                       (C4•Tl+C5•Ts+C7•Pl+C6•---+C8•--+C9•dT)
O2ml/l = [C1 • VDOe    5000   + C3] • fsat(T,P) • e                       dt    dt               (2.8.4.0) 


where: 

O2ml/l     Dissolved O2 concentration in ml/l; 

VDO        Raw sensor output; 

C1         Sensor slope 

C2         Hysteresis response coefficient 

C3         Sensor offset 

fsat(T,P)  O2 saturation at T,P (ml/l); 

T          in situ temperature (°C); 

P          in situ pressure (decibars); 

Ph         Low-pass filtered hysteresis pressure (decibars); 

Tl         Long-response low-pass filtered temperature (°C); 

Ts         Short-response low-pass filtered temperature (°C); 

Pl         Low-pass filtered pressure (decibars); 

dOc 
---        Sensor current gradient (mamps/sec);
dt 

dP 
--         Filtered package velocity (db/sec); 
dt 

dT         low-pass filtered thermal diffusion estimate (Ts -Tl). 

C4 - C9    Response coefficients. 


CTD O2 ml/l data are converted to mmol/kg units on demand. 

Manufacturer information on the SBE43 DO sensor, a modification of the Clark 
polarographic membrane technology, can be found at 
http://www.seabird.com/application_notes/AN64.htm. 

A faster-response JFE Advantech RinkoIII ARO-CAV Optical DO sensor, with its own 
oxygen temperature thermistor, was installed on the rosette and integrated with 
the ODF CTD from station 25 onward. ODF intends to evaluate it side-by-side with 
the SBE43 data, considering its possible use for future expeditions. Please 
contact ODF (odfdata@sts.ucsd.edu) for further information. Manufacturer 
information about the RinkoIII sensor can be found at http://www.jfe-
advantech.co.jp/eng/ocean/rinko/rinko3.html. 


2.9.  Bottle Sampling 

At the end of each rosette deployment water samples were drawn from the bottles 
in the following order: 

    • CFC-12, CFC-11, SF6,and N2O 
    • 3He 
    • Dissolved O2 
    • Dissolved Inorganic Carbon (DIC) 
    • pH 
    • Total Alkalinity 
    • 13Cand 14C 
    • Dissolved Organic Carbon (DOC) and Total Dissolved Nitrogen (TDN) 
    • Tritium 
    • Nutrients 
    • ∂15N-NO3 / ∂18O-NO3 
    • Salinity 
    • Dissolved Calcium 
    • Pigments HPLC 
    • CDOM 
    • ∂30Si 


Bottle serial numbers were assigned at the start of P16S, and corresponded to 
their rosette/carousel position. Aside from various repairs to bottles along the 
way, no bottles were replaced during this transect. The correspondence between 
individual sample containers and the rosette bottle position (1-36) from which 
the sample was drawn was recorded on the sample log for the cast. This log also 
included any comments or anomalous conditions noted about the rosette and 
bottles. One member of the sampling team was designated the sample cop, whose 
sole responsibility was to maintain this log and ensure that sampling progressed 
in the proper drawing order. 

Normal sampling practice included opening the drain valve and then the air vent 
on the bottle, indicating an air leak if water escaped. This observation 
together with other diagnostic comments (e.g., "lanyard caught in lid", 
"valve left open") that might later prove useful in determining sample integrity 
were routinely noted on the sample log. Drawing oxygen samples also involved 
taking the sample draw temperature from the bottle. The temperature was noted on 
the sample log and was sometimes useful in determining leaking or mis-tripped 
bottles. 

Once individual samples had been drawn and properly prepared, they were 
distributed for analysis. Oxygen, nutrient and salinity analyses were performed 
on computer-assisted (PC) analytical equipment networked to the data processing 
computer for centralized data management. 


2.10.  Bottle Tripping Issues 

Few bottle trip issues were encountered during P16S. In all cases either the 
carousel or bottle was fixed after issue was reported. On station 4, bottle 2 
carousel trigger was stuck and bottle did not close. On station 5, the bottom 
endcap lanyard hung up and bottle 32 did not trip close. On station 17, carousel 
trigger stuck and bottle 35 did not trip close. On station 65, data indicated a 
mis-trip on bottle 7. On station 81, data indicated a mis-trip on bottle 1. 
Numerous other minor bottle tripping and/or carousel issues occurred during 
P16S. Most of these problems were resolved by re-aligning the lanyards during 
cocking to avoid obstructions or snagging points. Individual mis-tripped bottles 
have been quality-coded 4. Samples taken from them have been quality-coded by 
appropriate analytical groups. More detailed comments with respect to ODF 
analysis appear in Appendix 2.C. 


2.11.  Bottle Data Processing 

Water samples collected and properties analyzed shipboard were centrally managed 
in a relational database (PostgreSQL NBP1403 ) running on a Linux system. A web 
service (OpenACS 5.5.0 and AOLServer 4.5.1) front- end provided ship-wide access 
to CTD and water sample data. Web-based facilities included on-demand arbitrary 
property-property plots and vertical sections as well as data uploads and 
downloads. 

The sample log information and any diagnostic comments were entered into the 
database once sampling was completed. Quality flags associated with sampled 
properties were set to indicate that the property had been sampled, and sample 
container identifications were noted where applicable (e.g., oxygen flask 
number). Acquisition and sampling details were also made available on the ODF 
shipboard website post-cast with scanned versions of the Console and Sample 
logs. 

Analytical results were provided on a regular basis by the various analytical 
groups and incorporated into the database. These results included a quality code 
associated with each measured value and followed the coding scheme developed for 
the World Ocean Circulation Experiment Hydrographic Programme (WHP) [Joyc94]. 

Table 2.11.0 shows the number of samples drawn and the number of times each WHP 
sample quality flag was assigned for each basic hydrographic property: 


Table 2.11.0: Frequency of WHP quality flag assignments. 

                            Rosette Samples Stations 1-90 
               ---------------------------------------------------
                          Reported            WHP Quality Codes 
                           levels        1    2    3   4  5  7   9 
                          --------       -  ----  --  --  -  -  --
               Bottle       3211         0  3186  12   6  1  0   6 
               CTD Salt     3211         0  3207   4   0  0  0   0 
               CTD Oxy      3123         0  3105   0  17  0  1  88
               Salinity     3127         0  3053  57  17  2  0  82
               Oxygen       3122         0  3111   3   8  6  0  83
               Silicate     3129         0  3119   1   9  0  0  82
               Nitrate      3129         0  3120   0   9  0  0  82
               Nitrite      3129         0  3120   0   9  0  0  82
               Phosphate    3129         0  3118   1  10  0  0  82
                          
           
Additionally, data investigation comments are presented in Appendix 2.C. 

Various consistency checks and detailed examination of the data continued 
throughout the cruise. Chief Scientist, Dr. Lynne Talley, reviewed the data and 
compared it with historical data sets. 


2.12. Salinity Analysis 

Equipment and Techniques 

One salinometer, a Guildline Autosal 8400B (S/N 65-740), was used throughout P16S. 
A spare 8400B (S/N 65-743) was maintained at 21C, but not used for sample 
analysis during this expedition. These salinometers utilized the typical 
National Instruments interface to decode Autosal data and communicate with a 
Windows-based acquisition PC. The original heat exchanger coil for this unit is 
replaced with a longer coil to increase heat transfer between the bath and the 
sample. All discrete salinity analyses were done in the RVIB Nathaniel B. 
Palmer's Salinity Lab. 

Samples were analyzed after they had equilibrated to laboratory temperature, 
usually within 6-20 hours after collection. The salinometer was standardized for 
each group of analyses (typically 1 cast, sometimes 2; up to 72 samples) using 
two fresh vials of standard seawater per group. In instances when 2 stations were 
run as a group, a third standard vial was run between the two stations. 

Salinometer measurements were made by a computer using LabVIEW software 
developed by SIO/STS. The software maintained an Autosal log of each salinometer 
run which included salinometer settings and air and bath temperatures. The air 
temperature was monitored via digital thermometer and displayed on an up-to 48-
hour strip- chart via LabVIEW in order to observe cyclical changes. The program 
guided the operator through the standardization procedure and making sample 
measurements. The analyst was prompted to change samples and flush the cell 
between readings. 

Standardization procedures included flushing the cell at least 2 times with a 
fresh vial of Standard Seawater (SSW), setting the flowrate to a low value during 
the last fill, and monitoring the STD dial setting. If the STD dial changed by 
10 units or more since the last salinometer run (or during standardization), 
another vial of SSW was opened and the standardization procedure repeated to 
verify the setting. Each salt sample bottle was agitated to minimize 
stratification before reading on the salinometer. Samples were run using 2 
flushes before the final fill. The computer determined the stability of a 
measurement and prompted for additional readings if there appeared to be drift. 
The operator could annotate the salinometer log, and would routinely add 
comments about cracked sample bottles, loose thimbles, salt crystals or anything 
unusual in the amount of sample in the bottle. 

Sample Collection, Equilibration and Data Processing 

A total of 3129 rosette salinity samples were measured. An additional 58 
underway samples were taken and analyzed between Hobart and the start of the 
150W line. 185 vials of standard seawater (IAPSO SSW) were used. Salinity 
samples were drawn into 200 ml Kimax high-alumina borosilicate bottles, which 
were rinsed three times with the sample prior to filling. The bottles were 
sealed with custom-made plastic insert thimbles and kept closed with Nalgene 
screwcaps. This assembly provides very low container dissolution and sample 
evaporation. Prior to sample collection, inserts were inspected for proper fit 
and loose inserts replaced to ensure an airtight seal. 

After samples were brought back to the analysis lab, the full case was placed on 
a shelf projecting from the workbench supporting the Autosal. Salt bottle 
storage boxes have either an open grid pattern material or have holes drilled 
between bottle locations to facilitate air circulation between the bottles from 
bottom to top. A fan circulated air down through the salt case. 

A thermometer was placed between two bottles that represent cooler but not the 
coldest temperatures, typically bottles 9 and 15 for the square cases and along 
side bottle 3, on the inner side, for the rectangular cases. Ambient air 
circulated through the case until indicated glass temperature was within 1°C of 
bath temperature. The fan was removed from the case, which was allowed to stand 
for 10 to 30 minutes before analyzing the salinities. Equilibration times were 
logged for all casts and laboratory temperatures were logged at the beginning 
and end of each run. 

PSS-78 salinity [UNES81] was calculated for each sample from the measured 
conductivity ratios. The difference between the initial vial of standard water 
and the next one run as an unknown was applied as a linear function of elapsed 
run time to the measured ratios. The corrected salinity data were then 
incorporated into the cruise database. 

Data processing included double checking that the station, sample and box number 
had been correctly assigned, and reviewing the data and log files for operator 
comments. Discrete salinity data were compared to CTD salinities and were used 
for shipboard sensor calibration. 

Laboratory Temperature 

The salinometer water bath temperature was maintained at 24°C. Except for one 
day, when the temperature control failed and was repaired, the ambient laboratory 
air temperature varied from 21 to 25.5°C, typically between 23 and 25°C. 

Standards 

IAPSO Standard Seawater Batch P-156 was used to standardize all stations. 

Analytical Problems 

No analytical problems were encountered on US-Repeat Hydrography(GO-SHIP) P16S. 

2.13. Oxygen Analysis 

Equipment and Techniques 

Dissolved oxygen analyses were performed with an SIO/ODF-designed automated 
oxygen titrator using photometric end-point detection based on the absorption of 
365nm wavelength ultra-violet light. The titration of the samples and the data 
logging were controlled by PC LabVIEW software. Thiosulfate was dispensed by a 
Dosimat 665 buret driver fitted with a 1.0 mL burette. ODF used a whole-bottle 
modified-Winkler titration following the technique of Carpenter[Carp65] with 
modifications by Culberson et al.[Culb91], but with higher concentrations of 
potassium iodate standard (approximately 0.012N) and thiosulfate solution 
(approximately 55 gm/l). Pre-made liquid potassium iodate standards were run 
every day (approximately every 2-4 stations), unless changes were made to the 
system or reagents. Reagent/distilled water blanks were determined every day or 
more often if a change in reagents required it to account for presence of 
oxidizing or reducing agents. 

Sampling and Data Processing 

3128 oxygen measurements were made from rosette samples. Another 58 measurements 
were made from samples taken every ~4hours on the transit from Hobart to the 
150W line. 

Samples were collected for dissolved oxygen analyses soon after the rosette was 
brought on board. Six different cases of 24 flasks each were rotated by station 
to minimize any potential flask calibration issues. Using a Tygon and silicone 
drawing tube, nominal 125mL volume-calibrated iodine flasks were rinsed 3 times 
with minimal agitation, then filled and allowed to overflow for at least 3 flask 
volumes. The sample drawing temperatures were measured with an electronic 
thermocouple temperature detector (TRACEABLE(tm) Model 89094-738) embedded in 
the drawing tube. These temperatures were used to calculate mmol/kg 
concentrations, and as a diagnostic check of bottle integrity. Reagents (MnCl2 
then NaI/NaOH) were added to fix the oxygen before stoppering. The flasks were 
shaken twice (10-12 inversions) to assure thorough dispersion of the 
precipitate, once immediately after drawing, and then again after about 30-40 
minutes. A water seal was applied to the rim of each bottle after shaking. 

The samples were analyzed within 2-14 hours of collection, and the data 
incorporated into the cruise database. Thiosulfate normalities were calculated 
from each standardization and corrected to 20°C. The 20°C normalities and the 
blanks were plotted versus time and were reviewed for possible problems. The 
blanks and thiosulfate normalities for each batch of thiosulfate were smoothed 
(linear fits) in two groups (stations 1-36 and stations 37-67) during the cruise, 
and the oxygen values recalculated. The last batch of thiosulfate (stations 68-
90) was intentionally not smoothed. The laboratory had a rapid temperature rise 
for the last few days of the cruise, which is believed to have caused the changes 
seen in the thio normalities. All differences between the original and 
"smoothed" data were less than ±0.25%. 

After the data were uploaded to the database, bottle oxygen was graphically 
compared with CTD oxygen and adjoining stations. Any points that appeared 
erroneous were reviewed and comments made regarding the final outcome of the 
investigation. These investigations and final data coding are reported in 
Appendix 2.C. 

Volumetric Calibration 

Oxygen flask volumes were determined gravimetrically with degassed deionized 
water to determine flask volumes at ODF's chemistry laboratory. This is done once 
before using flasks for the first time and periodically thereafter when a suspect 
volume is detected. The volumetric flasks used in preparing standards were 
volume-calibrated by the same method, as was the 10 mL Dosimat buret used to 
dispense standard iodate solution. 

Standards 

Liquid potassium iodate standards were prepared in 6 liter batches and bottled 
in sterile glass bottles at ODF's chemistry laboratory prior to the expedition. 
The normality of the liquid standard was determined by calculation from weight. 
The standard was supplied by AlfaAesar (lot B05N35) and has a reported purity of 
99.4-100.4%. All other reagents were "reagent grade" and were tested for levels 
of oxidizing and reducing impurities prior to use. 

Problems Encountered 

Around station 37, the thiosulfate was topped off and began to degrade with high 
variability in the thio normality. A new1Lbatch was made and used from station 37 
to 67. Samples for stations 37 and 38 waited for approximately 12 hours before 
being run. 

The thermocouple wire on the primary thermometer probe used during sampling 
broke twice, requiring backup temp probes to be used. The backup probes had a 
slower response than the thermocouple, possibly causing less accurate readings. 
The backup temperature probes were used for sampling stations 43 through 50 and 
stations 80 and 81. 

Additionally, several samples were lost due to simple operator errors such as 
forgetting the stir bar, or accidentally dumping a sample before being analyzed. 
A summary of these lost samples can be found in Appendix 2.C. 

2.14. Nutrient Analysis 

Summary of Analysis 

3129 samples from 90 ctd stations, and 58 from the underway system. The cruise 
started with new pump tubes and they were changed after stations 12, 29, 51, and 
70. 5 sets of Primary/Secondary standards were made up over the course of the 
cruise. The cadmium column efficiency was checked periodically and ranged between 
92%-100%. The column was replaced when efficiency was less than 97%. 

Equipment and Techniques 

Nutrient analyses (phosphate, silicate, nitrate plus nitrite, and nitrite) were 
performed on a Seal Analytical continuous-flow AutoAnalyzer 3 (AA3). The 
analytical methods used are described by Gordon et al. [Gord92], Hager et al. 
[Hage68] and Atlas et al. [Atla71]. The details of modification of analytical 
methods used for this cruise are also compatible with the methods described in 
the nutrient section of the GO-SHIP repeat hydrography manual [Hyde10]. 

Nitrate/Nitrite Analysis 

A modification of the Armstrong et al. [Arms67] procedure was used for the 
analysis of nitrate and nitrite. For nitrate analysis, a seawater sample was 
passed through a cadmium column where the nitrate was reduced to nitrite. This 
nitrite was then diazotized with sulfanilamide and coupled with N-(1-naphthyl)-
ethylenediamine to form a red dye. The sample was then passed through a 10mm 
flowcell and absorbance measured at 520nm. The procedure was the same for the 
nitrite analysis but without the cadmium column. 

REAGENTS 

Sulfanilamide 

Dissolve10g sulfanilamide in 1.2N HCl and bring to 1 liter volume. Add 2drops of 
40% surfynol 465/485 surfactant. Store at room temperature in a dark poly 
bottle. Note: 40% Surfynol 465/485 is 20% 465 plus 20% 485 in DIW. 

N-(1-Naphthyl)-ethylenediamine dihydrochloride (N-1-N) 

Dissolve1gN-1-N in DIW, bring to 1 liter volume. Add 2 drops 40% surfynol 465/485 
surfactant. Store at room temperature in a dark poly bottle. Discard if the 
solution turns dark reddish brown. 

Imidazole Buffer 

Dissolve13.6g imidazole in ˜3.8 liters DIW. Stir for at least 30 minutes to 
completely dissolve. Add 60 ml of CuSO4 +NH4Cl mix (see below). Add 4drops 40% 
Surfynol 465/485 surfactant. Let sit overnight before proceeding. Using 
a calibrated pH meter, adjust to pH of 7.83-7.85 with 10% (1.2N) HCl (about 20-30 
ml of acid, depending on exact strength). Bring final solution to 4L with 
DIW. Store at room temperature. 

NH4Cl + CuSO4 mix 

Dissolve2gcupric sulfate in DIW, bring to 100 m1 volume (2%). Dissolve250g 
ammonium chloride in DIW, bring to l liter volume. Add 5ml of 2% CuSO4 solution 
to this NH4Cl stock. This should last many months. 

Phosphate Analysis 

Ortho-Phosphate was analyzed using a modification of the Bernhardt and Wilhelms 
[Bern67] method. Acidified ammonium molybdate was added to a seawater sample to 
produce phosphomolybdic acid, which was then reduced to phosphomolybdous acid (a 
blue compound) following the addition of dihydrazine sulfate. The sample was 
passed through a 10mm flowcell and absorbance measured at 820nm. The 820nm bulb 
was only used for stations 1-10 and then changed to 880nm. 

REAGENTS 

Ammonium Molybdate 

H2SO4 solution: Pour 420 ml of DIW into a 2 liter Erlenmeyer flask or 
beaker, place this flask or beaker into an ice bath. SLOWLY add 330 ml of 
concentrated H2SO4.This solution gets VERY HOT!! Cool in the ice bath. Makeup as 
much as necessary in the above proportions. 

Dissolve27g ammonium molybdate in 250ml of DIW. Bring to 1 liter volume with the 
cooled sulfuric acid solution. 

Add 3 drops of 15% DDS surfactant. Store in a dark poly bottle. 

Dihydrazine Sulfate 

Dissolve6.4g dihydrazine sulfate in DIW, bring to 1 liter volume and refrigerate. 

Silicate Analysis 

Silicate was analyzed using the technique of Armstrong et al. [Arms67] Acidified 
ammonium molybdate was added to a seawater sample to produce silicomolybdic acid 
which was then reduced to silicomolybdous acid (a blue compound) following the 
addition of stannous chloride. The sample was passed through a 10mm flowcell and 
measured at 660nm. 

REAGENTS 

Tartaric Acid 

Dissolve 200g tartaric acid in DW and bring to 1 liter volume. Store at room 
temperature in a poly bottle. 

Ammonium Molybdate 

Dissolve 10.8g Ammonium Molybdate Tetrahydrate in ~ 900ml DW. Add 2.8ml 
H2SO4*to solution, then bring volume to 1000ml. 

Add 3-5 drops 15% SDS surfactant per liter of solution. 

Stannous Chloride stock (as needed) 

Dissolve 40g of stannous chloride in 100 ml 5N HCl. Refrigerate in a poly bottle. 

NOTE: Minimize oxygen introduction by swirling rather than shaking the solution. 
      Discard if a white solution (oxychloride) forms. 

Working (every 24 hours): Bring 5 ml of stannous chloride stock to 200 ml final 
volume with 1.2N HCl. Makeup daily - refrigerate when not in use in a dark poly 
bottle. 

Sampling 

Nutrient samples were drawn into 40 ml polypropylene screw-capped centrifuge 
tubes. The tubes and caps were cleaned with 10% HCl and rinsed 2-3 times with 
sample before filling. Samples were analyzed within 1-3 hours after sample 
collection, allowing sufficient time for all samples to reach room temperature. 
The centrifuge tubes fit directly onto the sampler. 

Data collection and processing 

Data collection and processing was done with the software (AACE ver.6.07) 
provided with the instrument from SEAL Analytical. After each run, the charts 
were reviewed for any problems during the run, any blank was subtracted, and final 
concentrations (mM) were calculated, based on a linear curve fit. Once the run 
was reviewed and concentrations calculated a text file was created. That text 
file was reviewed for possible problems and then converted to another text file 
with only sample identifiers and nutrient concentrations that was merged with 
other bottle data. 

Standards and Glassware calibration 

Primary standards for silicate (Na2SiF6), nitrate (KNO3), nitrite (NaNO2), and 
phosphate (KH2PO4)were obtained from Johnson Matthey Chemical Co. and/or Fisher 
Scientific. The supplier reports purities of >98%, 99.999%, 97%, and 99.999 
respectively. 

All glass volumetric flasks and pipettes were gravimetrically calibrated prior 
to the cruise. The primary standards were dried and weighed out to 0.1 mg prior 
to the cruise. The exact weight was noted for future reference. When primary 
standards were made, the flask volume at 20°C, the weight of the powder, and the 
temperature of the solution were used to buoyancy correct the weight, calculate 
the exact concentration of the solution, and determine how much of the primary 
was needed for the desired concentrations of secondary standard. Primary and 
secondary standards were made up every 7-10 days. The new standards were 
compared to the old before use. 

All the reagent solutions, primary and secondary standards were made with fresh 
distilled deionized water (DIW). 

Standardizations were performed at the beginning of each group of analyses with 
working standards prepared prior to each run from a secondary. Working standards 
were made up in low nutrient seawater (LNSW). Two different batches of LNSW were 
used on the cruise, the first for stations 1-40 and the second for the 
remainder, stations 41-90. Both were collected offshore of coastal California and 
treated in the lab. The water was first filtered through a0.45 micron filter then 
re-circulated for ˜8 hours through a 0.2 micron filter, passed a UV lamp and 
through a second 0.2 micron filter. The actual concentration of nutrients in this 
water was empirically determined during the standardization calculations. 


Table 2.14.0: US-Repeat Hydrography (GO-SHIP) P16S Concentration of working 
              standards used in micro-moles per liter. 

                              µM    µM    µM    µM
                      Batch   N+N   PO4  SiO3   NO2 
                      -----  -----  ---  -----  ----
                        0)    0.0   0.0    0.0  0.0 
                        3)   15.50  1.2   60    0.50 
                        5)   31.00  2.4  120    1.0 
                        7)   46.50  3.6  180    1.5 


Quality Control 

All data were reported in mM (micromoles/liter). NO3, PO4, and NO2 were reported 
to two decimal places and SiO3 to one. Accuracy is based on the quality of the 
standards; the levels were: 


Table 2.14.1: US-Repeat Hydrography(GO-SHIP) P16S Nutrient Accuracy 

                          Parameter  Accuracy(µM)
                          ---------  -----------
                             NO3        0.05 
                             PO4        0.004 
                             SiO3       2-4 
                             NO2        0.05 


All final data was reported in micro-moles/kg after it has been merged with the 
CTD trip information in the bottle file. 

As is standard ODF practice, a deep calibration "check" sample was run with each 
set of samples to estimate precision within the cruise. The data are tabulated 
below. 


Table 2.14.2 US-Repeat Hydrography(GO-SHIP) P16S Deep Calibration Values. 

                       Parameter  Concentration (µM) 
                       ---------  ------------------
                         NO3        32.90 +/- 0.18 
                         PO4         2.27 +/- 0.02 
                         SiO3      127.0  +/- 0.71 
                         NO2         0.01 +/- 0.009 


SIO/ODF has been using Reference Materials for Nutrients in Seawater (RMNS) on 
repeat Hydrograph cruises as another estimate of accuracy and precision for each 
cruise since 2009. The accuracy and precision (standard deviation) for this 
cruise were measured by analysis of a RMNS with each run. 

The RMNS preparation, verification, and suggested protocol for use of the 
material are described by Aoyama et al. [Aoya06] [Aoya07] [Aoya08] and Sato et 
al. [Sato10]. RMNS batch BX was used on this cruise, with each bottle being used 
twice before being discarded and a new one opened. Data are tabulated below. 


Table 2.14.3: US-Repeat Hydrography(GO-SHIP) P16S Concentration of RMNS 
              standard. 

           Parameter  Concentration (µmol kg-1)  Assigned   Diff 
           ---------  -------------------------  --------  ------
             NO3          43.05  +/- 0.21         43.00    -0.05 
             PO4           2.89  +/- 0.026         2.907    0.017 
             SiO3        138.1   +/- 0.69        136.0     -2.1 
             NO2           0.039 +/- 0.006         0.034   -0.005 



Analytical Problems 

There was significant loss of column efficiency that required frequent columns 
changes at the beginning of the cruise. It was tracked down to inaccurate 
adjusting of the pH of the imidazole buffer. The buffer preparation was changed 
to adding 10 mls of 10 percent hydrochloric acid without checking the pH. The 
column efficiency was stable and the columns lasted longer after this practice 
was implemented. 

There was significant noise in the phosphate signal and baseline at the start of 
the cruise. The photometer was loose and was not staying in place. Anew 
photometer/flowcell/light source combination was put on prior to station 11. The 
phosphate signal was much better after that change. Occasional baseline drops 
were still a problem but monitoring of the deep check sample and the RMNS values 
allowed for detection of problems and corrections to be implemented so the data 
quality did not suffer. 


References 

Aoya06. 
Aoyama, M., "Intercomparison Exercise for Reference Material for Nutrients in 
    Seawater in a Seawater Matrix," Technical Reports of the Meteorological 
    Research Institute No.50, p. 91, Tsukuba, Japan. (2006a). 

Aoya08. 
Aoyama, M., Barwell-Clark, J., Becker, S., Blum, M., Braga, E.S., Coverly, S.C., 
    Czobik, E., Dahllof, I., Dai, M.H., Donnell, G.O., Engelke, C., Gong, G.C., 
    Hong, Gi-Hoon, Hydes, D.J., Jin, M.M., Kasai, H., Kerouel, R., Kiyomono, 
    Y., Knockaert, M., Kress, N., Krogslund, K. A., Kumagai, M., Leterme, S., 
    Li, Yarong, Masuda, S., Miyao, T., Moutin, T., Murata, A., Nagai, N., 
    Nausch, G., Ngirchechol, M. K., Nybakk, A., Ogaw a,H., Ooijen, J. van, Ota, 
    H., Pan, J. M., Payne, C., Pierre-Duplessix, O., Pujo-Pay, M., Raabe, T., 
    Saito, K., Sato, K., Schmidt, C., Schuett, M., Shammon, T.M., Sun, J., 
    Tanhua, T., White, L., Woodward, E.M.S., Worsfold, P., Yeats, P., Yoshimura, 
    T., A. Youenou, and Zhang, J. Z., "2006 Intercomparison Exercise for 
    Reference Material for Nutrients in Seawater in a Seawater Matrix," 
    Technical Reports of the Meteorological Research Institute No. 58, p. 104pp 
    (2008). 

Aoya07. 
Aoyama, M., Susan, B., Minhan, D., Hideshi, D., Louis, I. G., Kasai, H., Roger, 
    K., Nurit, K., Doug, M., Murata, A., Nagai, N., Ogaw a,H., Ota, H., Saito, 
    H., Saito, K., Shimizu, T., Takano, H., Tsuda, A., Yokouchi, K., and Agnes, 
    Y., "Recent Comparability of Oceanographic Nutrients Data: Results of a 2003 
    Intercomparison Exercise Using Reference Materials.," Analytical Sciences, 
    23: 115, pp. 1-1154 (2007). 

Arms67. 
Armstrong, F.A.J., Stearns, C. R., and Strickland, J. D. H., "The measurement of 
    upwelling and subsequent biological processes by means of the Technicon 
    Autoanalyzer and associated equipment," Deep-Sea Research, 14, pp. 381-389 
    (1967). 

Atla71. 
Atlas, E. L., Hager, S.W., Gordon, L. I., and Park, P.K., "A Practical Manual 
    for Use of the Technicon AutoAnalyzer(r) in Seawater Nutrient Analyses 
    Revised," Technical Report 215, Reference 71-22, p. 49, Oregon State 
    University, Department of Oceanography(1971). 

Bern67. 
Bernhardt, H. and Wilhelms, A., "The continuous determination of low level iron, 
    soluble phosphate and total phosphate with the AutoAnalyzer," Technicon 
    Symposia, I, pp. 385-389 (1967). 

Brow78. 
Brown, N. L. and Morrison, G. K., "WHOI/Brown conductivity, temperature and 
    depth microprofiler," Technical Report No. 78-23, Woods Hole Oceanographic 
    Institution (1978). 

Carp65. 
Carpenter, J.H., "The Chesapeake Bay Institute technique for the Winkler 
    dissolved oxygen method," Limnology and Oceanography, 10, pp. 141-143 
    (1965). 

Culb91. 
Culberson, C. H., Knapp, G., Stalcup, M., Williams, R. T., and Zemlyak, F., 
    "A comparison of methods for the determination of dissolved oxygen in 
    seawater," Report WHPO 91-2, WOCE Hydrographic Programme Office (Aug 1991). 

Gord92. 
Gordon, L. I., Jennings, J. C., Jr., Ross, A. A., and Krest, J. M., "A suggested 
    Protocol for Continuous Flow Automated Analysis of Seawater Nutrients in the 
    WOCE Hydrographic Program and the Joint Global Ocean Fluxes Study," Grp.   
    Tech Rpt 92-1, OSU College of Oceanography Descr. Chem Oc. (1992). 

Hage68. 
Hager, S.W., Gordon, L. I., and Park, P.K., "A Practical Manual for Use of the 
    Technicon AutoAnalyzer(r) in Seawater Nutrient Analyses.," Final report to 
    Bureau of Commercial Fisheries, Contract 14-17-0001-1759., p. 31pp, Oregon 
    State University, Department of Oceanography, Reference No. 68-33. (1968). 

Hyde10. 
Hydes, D. J., Aoyama, M., Aminot, A., Bakker, K., Becker, S., Coverly, S., 
    Daniel, A., Dickson, A. G., Grosso, O., Kerouel, R., Ooijen, J. van, Sato, 
    K., Tanhua, T., Woodward, E. M. S., and Zhang, J. Z., "Determination of 
    Dissolved Nutrients (N, P, Si) in Seawater with High Precision and Inter-
    Comparability Using Gas- Segmented Continuous Flow Analysers" in GO-SHIP 
    Repeat Hydrography Manual: A Collection of Expert Reports and Guidelines. 
    IOCCP Report No. 14, ICPO Publication Series No 134 (2010a). 

Joyc94.  
Joyce, T., ed. and Corry, C., ed., "Requirements for WOCE Hydrographic Programme 
    Data Reporting," Report WHPO 90-1, WOCE Report No. 67/91, pp. 52-55, WOCE 
    Hydrographic Programme Office, Woods Hole, MA, USA (May 1994, Rev. 2). 
    UNPUBLISHED MANUSCRIPT. 

Mill82. 
Millard, R. C., Jr., "CTD calibration and data processing techniques at WHOI 
    using the practical salinity scale," Proc. Int. STD Conference and Workshop, 
    p. 19, Mar. Tech. Soc., La Jolla, Ca. (1982). 

Owen85. 
Owens, W.B. and Millard, R. C., Jr., "Anew algorithm for CTD oxygen 
    calibration," Journ. of Am. Meteorological Soc., 15, p. 621 (1985). 

Sato10. 
Sato, K., Aoyama, M., and Becker, S., "RMNS as Calibration Standard Solution to 
    Keep Comparability for Several Cruises in the World Ocean in 2000s.," 
    Aoyama, M., Dickson, A.G., Hydes, D.J., Murata, A., Oh, J.R., Roose, P., 
    Woodward, E.M.S., (Eds.) Comparability of nutrients in the world's ocean., 
    pp. 43-56, Tsukuba, JAPAN: MOTHER TANK (2010b). 

UNES81. 
UNESCO, "Background papers and supporting data on the Practical Salinity Scale, 
    1978,"UNESCO Technical Papers in Marine Science, No. 37, p. 144 (1981). 




                                   Appendix 2.A

US-Repeat Hydrography(GO-SHIP) P16S: CTD Temperature and Conductivity Corrections 
                                     Summary

                         ITS-90 Temperature Coefficients

            Sta/           corT =tp2*corP2 +tp1*corP + t1*T+t0 
            Cast      tp2           tp1           t1            t0 

             1/2   8.08415e-12   1.29654e-07  2.40000e-04  -0.00041253 
             2/1  -3.92977e-11  -1.26878e-07  5.37384e-05  -0.00077777 
             3/1  -3.92977e-11  -1.26878e-07  5.37384e-05  -0.00077777 
             4/3  -3.92977e-11  -1.26878e-07  5.37384e-05  -0.00077777 
             5/3   8.08415e-12  -1.89214e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00064658 
             6/1  -3.92977e-11  -1.26878e-07  5.37384e-05  -0.00077777 
             7/1  -3.92977e-11  -1.26878e-07  5.37384e-05  -0.00077777 
             8/1  -3.92977e-11  -1.26878e-07  5.37384e-05  -0.00077777 
             9/1  -3.92977e-11  -1.26878e-07  5.37384e-05  -0.00077777 
            10/1  -3.92977e-11  -1.26878e-07  5.37384e-05  -0.00077777
            11/1  -3.92977e-11  -1.26878e-07  5.37384e-05  -0.00077777 
            12/1  -3.92977e-11  -1.26878e-07  5.37384e-05  -0.00077777 
            13/1  -3.92977e-11  -1.26878e-07  5.37384e-05  -0.00077777 
            14/1  -3.92977e-11  -1.26878e-07  5.37384e-05  -0.00077777 
            15/1  -1.70942e-10   3.85216e-07  2.78977e-04  -0.00149899 
            16/1  -1.70942e-10   3.85216e-07  2.78977e-04  -0.00149899 
            17/2  -1.70942e-10   3.85216e-07  2.78977e-04  -0.00149899 
            18/1  -1.70942e-10   3.85216e-07  2.78977e-04  -0.00149899 
            19/1  -1.70942e-10   3.85216e-07  2.78977e-04  -0.00149899 
            20/1  -1.70942e-10   3.85216e-07  2.78977e-04  -0.00149899 
            21/1  -1.70942e-10   3.85216e-07  2.78977e-04  -0.00149899 
            22/1  -5.34418e-11   3.16085e-07  2.23999e-04  -0.00067781 
            23/1  -5.34418e-11   3.16085e-07  2.23999e-04  -0.00067781 
            24/1  -5.34418e-11   3.16085e-07  2.23999e-04  -0.00067781 
            25/1  -5.34418e-11   3.16085e-07  2.23999e-04  -0.00067781 
            26/1  -5.34418e-11   3.16085e-07  2.23999e-04  -0.00067781 
            27/1  -5.34418e-11   3.16085e-07  2.23999e-04  -0.00067781 
            28/1   4.09003e-11  -5.83485e-08  3.71046e-04  -0.00064631 
            29/1   4.09003e-11  -5.83485e-08  3.71046e-04  -0.00064631 
            30/1   4.09003e-11  -5.83485e-08  3.71046e-04  -0.00064631 
            31/1   4.09003e-11  -5.83485e-08  3.71046e-04  -0.00064631 
            32/1   4.09003e-11  -5.83485e-08  3.71046e-04  -0.00064631 
            33/1   8.08415e-12  -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            34/1   8.08415e-12  -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            35/1   8.08415e-12  -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            36/1   8.08415e-12  -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            37/2   8.08415e-12  -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            38/1   8.08415e-12  -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            39/3   8.08415e-12  -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            40/2   8.08415e-12  -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            41/1   8.08415e-12  -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            42/1   8.08415e-12  -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            43/3   8.08415e-12  -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            44/1   8.08415e-12  -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            45/1   8.08415e-12  -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            46/1   8.08415e-12  -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            47/1   8.08415e-12  -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            48/3   8.08415e-12  -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            49/1   8.08415e-12  -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            50/1   8.08415e-12  -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            51/3   8.08415e-12  -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            52/1   8.08415e-12  -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            53/1   8.08415e-12  -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            54/1   8.08415e-12  -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            55/1  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            56/2  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            57/1  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            58/3  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            59/1  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            60/1  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            61/1  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            62/1  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            63/3  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            64/1  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            65/1  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            66/2  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            67/1  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            68/1  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            69/1  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            70/1  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            71/1  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            72/1  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            73/1  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            74/2  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            75/1  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            76/1  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            77/3  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            78/1  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            79/1  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            80/3  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            81/1  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            82/1  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            83/3  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            84/1  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            85/1  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            86/2  8.08415e-12   -5.81235e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00047796 
            87/1  8.08415e-12   -1.89276e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00053832 
            88/1  8.08415e-12   -1.89276e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00053832 
            89/3  8.08415e-12   -1.89276e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00053832 
            90/1  8.08415e-12   -1.89276e-08  2.40000e-04  -0.00053832 



                                      Conductivity Coefficients

Sta/                 corC =cp2*corP2 +cp1*corP + ct2*corT2 +ct1*corT + c2*C2 +c1*C+c0 
Cast       cp2           cp1          ct2           ct1           c2            c1            c0 

 1/2   1.75480e-10  -1.21353e-06  0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00020477  
 2/1  -1.69141e-11  -4.83210e-07  1.89170e-06  -5.47861e-05   0.00000e+00   1.97380e-04  -0.00529380  
 3/1  -1.69141e-11  -4.83210e-07  1.89170e-06  -5.47861e-05   0.00000e+00   1.97380e-04  -0.00529428  
 4/3  -1.69141e-11  -4.83210e-07  1.89170e-06  -5.47861e-05   0.00000e+00   1.97380e-04  -0.00529448  
 5/3   1.08624e-10  -1.03741e-06  0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00038806  
 6/1  -1.69141e-11  -4.83210e-07  1.89170e-06  -5.47861e-05   0.00000e+00   1.97380e-04  -0.00518231  
 7/1  -1.69141e-11  -4.83210e-07  1.89170e-06  -5.47861e-05   0.00000e+00   1.97380e-04  -0.00518439  
 8/1  -1.69141e-11  -4.83210e-07  1.89170e-06  -5.47861e-05   0.00000e+00   1.97380e-04  -0.00518650  
 9/1  -1.69141e-11  -4.83210e-07  1.89170e-06  -5.47861e-05   0.00000e+00   1.97380e-04  -0.00518897  
10/1  -1.69141e-11  -4.83210e-07  1.89170e-06  -5.47861e-05   0.00000e+00   1.97380e-04  -0.00519103  
11/1  -1.69141e-11  -4.83210e-07  1.89170e-06  -5.47861e-05   0.00000e+00   1.97380e-04  -0.00519657  
12/1  -1.69141e-11  -4.83210e-07  1.89170e-06  -5.47861e-05   0.00000e+00   1.97380e-04  -0.00519884  
13/1  -1.69141e-11  -4.83210e-07  1.89170e-06  -5.47861e-05   0.00000e+00   1.97380e-04  -0.00520262  
14/1  -1.69141e-11  -4.83210e-07  1.89170e-06  -5.47861e-05   0.00000e+00   1.97380e-04  -0.00520461  
15/1  -2.25428e-10   7.40449e-07  0.00000e+00   9.07661e-05   0.00000e+00  -2.49290e-04   0.01087920  
16/1  -2.25428e-10   7.40449e-07  0.00000e+00   9.07661e-05   0.00000e+00  -2.49290e-04   0.01090440  
17/2  -2.25428e-10   7.40449e-07  0.00000e+00   9.07661e-05   0.00000e+00  -2.49290e-04   0.01093340  
18/1  -2.25428e-10   7.40449e-07  0.00000e+00   9.07661e-05   0.00000e+00  -2.49290e-04   0.01095510  
19/1  -2.25428e-10   7.40449e-07  0.00000e+00   9.07661e-05   0.00000e+00  -2.49290e-04   0.01097160  
20/1  -2.25428e-10   7.40449e-07  0.00000e+00   9.07661e-05   0.00000e+00  -2.49290e-04   0.01100470  
21/1  -2.25428e-10   7.40449e-07  0.00000e+00   9.07661e-05   0.00000e+00  -2.49290e-04   0.01102670  
22/1   4.22399e-11  -5.95999e-07  0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00139734  
23/1   4.22399e-11  -5.95999e-07  0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00139525  
24/1   4.22399e-11  -5.95999e-07  0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00139330  
25/1   4.22399e-11  -5.95999e-07  0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00139024  
26/1   4.22399e-11  -5.95999e-07  0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00138794  
27/1   4.22399e-11  -5.95999e-07  0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00138175  
28/1   2.12355e-10  -1.57686e-06  0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00269719  
29/1   2.12355e-10  -1.57686e-06  0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00269525  
30/1   2.12355e-10  -1.57686e-06  0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00269300  
31/1   2.12355e-10  -1.57686e-06  0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00269086  
32/1   2.12355e-10  -1.57686e-06  0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00000e+00   0.00269078  
33/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00030450  
34/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00031293  
35/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00032040  
36/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00032921  
37/2   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00033775  
38/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00034648  
39/3   1.82849e-10  -1.09777e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00096041  
40/2   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00037703  
41/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00038733  
42/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00039673  
43/3   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00040846  
44/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00041834  
45/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00042790  
46/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00044056  
47/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00045014  
48/3   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00046137  
49/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00047126  
50/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00048071  
51/3   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00049162  
52/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00050111  
53/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00051064  
54/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00052211  
55/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00053509  
56/2   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00055024  
57/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00056142  
58/3   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00057325  
59/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00058299  
60/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00059243  
61/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00060279  
62/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00061207  
63/3   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00062292  
64/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00063245  
65/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00064300  
66/2   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00065415  
67/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00066348  
68/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00067341  
69/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00068344  
70/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00069238  
71/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00070180  
72/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00071164  
73/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00072079  
74/2   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00073028  
75/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00073997  
76/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00074891  
77/3   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00075928  
78/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00076820  
79/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00077736  
80/3   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00078753  
81/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00079640  
82/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00080506  
83/3   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00081551  
84/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00082403  
85/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00083252  
86/2   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00084297  
87/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00085114  
88/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00085952  
89/3   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00086957  
90/1   1.82849e-10  -1.30110e-06  6.27235e-06  -2.24446e-04  -8.31047e-06   4.57817e-04  -0.00087813  




                                                   Appendix 2.B

                     Summary of US-Repeat Hydrography(GO-SHIP) P16S CTD Oxygen Time Constants
                                           (time constants in seconds)

               Pressure       Temperature            Pressure     O2 Gradient  Velocity     Thermal 
           Hysteresis (τh)  Long(τTl)  Short(τTs)  Gradient (τp)     (τog)       (τdP)   Diffusion (τdT)
           ---------------  ---------  ----------  -------------  -----------  --------  ---------------
                 50.0         300.0       4.0          0.50          8.00        200.00       300.0 


               US-Repeat Hydrography(GO-SHIP) P16S: Conversion Equation Coefficients for CTD Oxygen
                                           (refer to Equation 1.9.4.0)

                                                                          dOc          dP 
 Sta/    OcSlope    Offset   Phcoeff   Tlcoeff     Tscoeff     Plcoeff    ---coeff     --coeff    TdTcoeff
                                                                          dt           dt
 Cast      (c1)      (c3)     (c2)      (c4)        (c5)        (c6)        (c7)         (c8)       (c9) 

001/02  7.358e-04  -0.3511  -0.0337  -2.328e-02  -8.635e-03  -2.602e-03  -8.206e-03  -2.602e-03   3.877e-02  
002/01  5.956e-04  -0.2493  -0.1365   6.878e-03   7.639e-05  -9.694e-03   6.431e-03  -9.694e-03  -7.624e-03  
003/01  6.442e-04  -0.3115  -0.2424   9.438e-03  -1.010e-03  -1.102e-02   7.546e-03  -1.102e-02   1.116e-02  
004/03  6.417e-04  -0.3139  -0.0200   7.522e-03   1.943e-03   8.263e-03   9.116e-03   8.263e-03   5.286e-03  
005/03  6.193e-04  -0.2673  -0.0621   2.820e-03   5.925e-04  -1.203e-02   1.931e-02  -1.203e-02  -5.949e-03  
006/01  5.918e-04  -0.2209  -0.1002   9.758e-03  -1.920e-02  -1.424e-02   1.467e-02  -1.424e-02   4.271e-03  
007/01  5.918e-04  -0.2209  -0.1002   9.758e-03  -1.920e-02  -1.424e-02   1.467e-02  -1.424e-02   4.271e-03  
008/01  6.444e-04  -0.3160  -0.0489   7.209e-03   1.196e-02  -3.509e-03   2.940e-03  -3.509e-03   1.114e-03  
009/01  6.377e-04  -0.3031  -0.0631   1.479e-02   4.202e-03  -1.002e-02   4.891e-03  -1.002e-02   2.469e-03  
010/01  6.116e-04  -0.2576  -0.1387   5.742e-03  -5.424e-03  -1.666e-02   1.861e-03  -1.666e-02  -3.020e-03  

011/01  5.950e-04  -0.2223  -0.0954  -1.098e-02  -8.250e-04  -1.745e-02   7.675e-03  -1.745e-02  -4.154e-02  
012/01  6.512e-04  -0.3481  -0.1331   1.019e-02   4.051e-02  -9.357e-03   1.075e-02  -9.357e-03   9.326e-03  
013/01  6.072e-04  -0.2329   0.1193   9.075e-03  -3.781e-02   4.076e-03   1.527e-02   4.076e-03   1.470e-02  
014/01  6.105e-04  -0.3046  -0.2496   2.154e-02   4.616e-02  -2.006e-02   1.234e-02  -2.006e-02   3.559e-03  
015/01  5.808e-04  -0.2718  -0.3506  -7.944e-03   5.230e-02  -2.375e-02   9.679e-03  -2.375e-02   1.123e-02  
016/01  6.003e-04  -0.2527  -0.0899   1.296e-02  -3.141e-04  -7.524e-03   5.302e-03  -7.524e-03   6.079e-04  
017/02  6.220e-04  -0.2857  -0.3045  -1.242e-02   1.604e-02  -5.126e-03   5.280e-03  -5.126e-03   3.377e-03  
018/01  5.973e-04  -0.2567  -0.1305   1.114e-02   1.305e-02  -1.053e-02   1.087e-03  -1.053e-02  -2.823e-02  
019/01  5.958e-04  -0.2607  -0.2528   2.096e-02   1.328e-02  -1.806e-02   1.022e-02  -1.806e-02   9.825e-03  
020/01  5.989e-04  -0.2589  -0.5488   1.465e-02   1.034e-02  -4.955e-02   3.625e-03  -4.955e-02  -7.896e-03  
  
021/01  6.239e-04  -0.3512  -0.3249   8.490e-03   7.291e-02  -5.875e-02  -1.049e-02  -5.875e-02   6.674e-04  
022/01  6.048e-04  -0.2591  -0.1815  -3.402e-03   1.013e-02  -1.010e-02   5.584e-03  -1.010e-02  -4.495e-03  
023/01  5.909e-04  -0.2657  -0.1621   2.248e-03   2.303e-02  -1.124e-02   3.848e-03  -1.124e-02  -7.897e-03  
024/01  4.490e-04  -0.1179   0.0338   3.827e-02   1.129e-02  -2.348e-02   6.709e-03  -2.348e-02  -1.068e-01  
025/01  5.670e-04  -0.2172  -0.1706   4.650e-03   4.799e-03  -1.241e-02  -2.498e-04  -1.241e-02  -1.960e-02  
026/01  5.937e-04  -0.2446  -0.1490   4.369e-03  -3.693e-04  -9.830e-03   5.738e-03  -9.830e-03   4.872e-03  
027/01  5.886e-04  -0.2389  -0.1535   3.051e-03   2.085e-04  -5.912e-03   7.088e-03  -5.912e-03   1.822e-03  
028/01  5.658e-04  -0.2195  -0.2255   1.206e-02  -3.426e-03  -1.894e-02  -1.871e-03  -1.894e-02  -5.422e-03  
029/01  6.297e-04  -0.2596   0.0116   1.683e-04  -4.762e-03  -4.325e-03   4.071e-03  -4.325e-03   2.472e-02  
030/01  6.494e-04  -0.2881   0.1526  -7.320e-03   2.151e-03   7.906e-03   5.634e-03   7.906e-03   8.586e-03  

031/01  7.561e-04  -0.3940   0.4940  -1.294e-02  -1.785e-03   4.288e-03  -4.816e-04   4.288e-03   9.810e-03  
032/01  7.562e-04  -0.3843   0.2189  -1.350e-02  -2.182e-03   4.442e-03   3.560e-03   4.442e-03   1.786e-02  
033/01  5.965e-04  -0.2353  -0.0109   2.939e-03  -3.398e-03  -1.863e-03  -3.852e-05  -1.863e-03   8.972e-03  
034/01  5.925e-04  -0.2409  -0.0769   5.806e-03  -4.425e-03  -1.462e-02   2.229e-03  -1.462e-02   2.007e-03  
035/01  7.505e-04  -0.3560   0.3201   2.630e-03  -1.822e-02  -3.557e-02  -3.261e-03  -3.557e-02   1.994e-02  
036/01  6.489e-04  -0.2567   0.0210  -6.008e-03   5.803e-03  -1.167e-02  -4.903e-03  -1.167e-02  -5.203e-03  
037/02  6.202e-04  -0.2333  -0.0893  -2.637e-03   5.244e-03  -1.181e-02  -4.437e-04  -1.181e-02  -3.117e-03  
038/01  6.382e-04  -0.2507  -0.1133   1.901e-03  -9.189e-04  -1.144e-02   1.735e-03  -1.144e-02   3.827e-05  
039/03  6.231e-04  -0.2238  -0.0644   2.163e-03  -8.537e-04  -2.590e-02  -2.345e-04  -2.590e-02   1.771e-03  
040/02  6.286e-04  -0.2450  -0.1344   3.154e-03  -6.574e-04  -1.753e-02  -9.528e-05  -1.753e-02  -1.466e-04  

041/01  6.425e-04  -0.2531  -0.0942  -1.864e-03   2.638e-03  -1.547e-02   7.142e-04  -1.547e-02  -4.542e-03  
042/01  6.318e-04  -0.2425  -0.0942  -2.734e-04   2.267e-03  -2.023e-02   2.404e-03  -2.023e-02  -5.154e-03  
043/03  6.346e-04  -0.2429  -0.1090   3.053e-04   1.031e-03  -1.879e-02  -3.225e-03  -1.879e-02  -2.464e-03  
044/01  6.313e-04  -0.2442  -0.1167   2.413e-04   1.854e-03  -1.807e-02   1.361e-03  -1.807e-02  -3.237e-03  
045/01  6.320e-04  -0.2426  -0.1161   2.852e-05   2.216e-03  -2.044e-02  -7.217e-04  -2.044e-02  -5.873e-03  
046/01  6.420e-04  -0.2498  -0.0787  -1.155e-03   2.105e-03  -1.510e-02  -3.527e-03  -1.510e-02  -1.718e-03  
047/01  6.316e-04  -0.2419  -0.1155   5.868e-04   1.870e-03  -1.780e-02  -2.521e-03  -1.780e-02  -3.255e-03  
048/03  6.300e-04  -0.2388  -0.1157  -1.458e-03   3.644e-03  -2.026e-02  -2.610e-03  -2.026e-02  -4.974e-03  
049/01  6.301e-04  -0.2423  -0.1219   5.647e-04   1.910e-03  -2.044e-02   2.462e-03  -2.044e-02  -5.102e-03  
050/01  6.290e-04  -0.2413  -0.1149   9.763e-04   1.638e-03  -2.016e-02   8.025e-04  -2.016e-02  -4.229e-03  
 
051/03  6.365e-04  -0.2429  -0.0739   4.527e-04   9.690e-04  -1.943e-02   7.171e-04  -1.943e-02  -2.909e-03  
052/01  6.378e-04  -0.2481  -0.1036   9.735e-05   1.523e-03  -1.724e-02  -6.076e-04  -1.724e-02  -2.894e-03  
053/01  6.346e-04  -0.2405  -0.0963   2.612e-04   1.254e-03  -1.900e-02   4.723e-03  -1.900e-02  -3.029e-03  
054/01  6.385e-04  -0.2423  -0.0804  -1.261e-03   1.953e-03  -1.938e-02  -2.099e-03  -1.938e-02  -2.757e-03  
055/01  6.343e-04  -0.2418  -0.1104  -1.041e-03   2.368e-03  -1.951e-02   1.516e-04  -1.951e-02  -3.726e-03  
056/02  6.331e-04  -0.2423  -0.1109  -5.368e-04   1.823e-03  -2.132e-02   1.481e-03  -2.132e-02  -2.660e-03  
057/01  6.438e-04  -0.2509  -0.0708   8.505e-04  -2.891e-04  -1.941e-02  -1.238e-03  -1.941e-02  -1.164e-03  
058/03  6.370e-04  -0.2419  -0.1104  -1.196e-03   2.089e-03  -1.874e-02  -3.365e-04  -1.874e-02  -3.215e-03  
059/01  6.484e-04  -0.2540  -0.0622   6.090e-04  -1.700e-04  -1.686e-02   1.495e-03  -1.686e-02  -1.362e-03  
060/01  6.380e-04  -0.2430  -0.0986   6.257e-04   1.702e-04  -1.689e-02  -2.750e-03  -1.689e-02  -5.422e-04  

061/01  6.315e-04  -0.2429  -0.1449  -2.039e-03   3.599e-03  -2.016e-02   1.375e-03  -2.016e-02  -5.062e-03  
062/01  6.339e-04  -0.2441  -0.1257  -4.055e-06   1.416e-03  -1.811e-02  -2.211e-03  -1.811e-02  -2.179e-03  
063/03  6.343e-04  -0.2398  -0.1248   2.878e-03  -2.093e-03  -1.920e-02  -1.607e-03  -1.920e-02   8.789e-04  
064/01  6.410e-04  -0.2480  -0.1091   1.675e-03  -1.026e-03  -1.696e-02   2.768e-03  -1.696e-02  -2.436e-05  
065/01  6.391e-04  -0.2475  -0.1159   3.507e-04   6.373e-04  -1.557e-02   5.054e-03  -1.557e-02  -1.663e-03  
066/02  6.391e-04  -0.2451  -0.1267   1.914e-03  -1.186e-03  -1.456e-02   7.092e-04  -1.456e-02   5.849e-04  
067/01  6.394e-04  -0.2460  -0.1189   8.735e-04  -8.279e-05  -1.520e-02  -2.963e-04  -1.520e-02  -1.691e-04  
068/01  6.346e-04  -0.2434  -0.1413   3.451e-04   6.264e-04  -1.531e-02  -1.859e-04  -1.531e-02  -9.591e-04  
069/01  6.338e-04  -0.2440  -0.1608  -3.949e-04   1.530e-03  -1.672e-02   5.192e-03  -1.672e-02  -2.228e-03  
070/01  6.377e-04  -0.2457  -0.1114   6.544e-04   1.944e-04  -1.701e-02   1.092e-03  -1.701e-02  -1.058e-03  
 
071/01  6.389e-04  -0.2467  -0.1127  -1.614e-06   7.798e-04  -1.576e-02   3.296e-04  -1.576e-02  -1.391e-03  
072/01  6.322e-04  -0.2417  -0.1656  -1.811e-04   1.299e-03  -1.752e-02   2.513e-03  -1.752e-02  -1.412e-03  
073/01  6.421e-04  -0.2543  -0.1486  -9.059e-04   1.677e-03  -1.697e-02  -3.665e-03  -1.697e-02  -2.073e-03  
074/02  6.359e-04  -0.2460  -0.1425   2.953e-04   6.122e-04  -1.459e-02   7.203e-04  -1.459e-02  -7.036e-04  
075/01  6.417e-04  -0.2492  -0.1257   3.586e-04   2.046e-04  -1.468e-02   7.210e-03  -1.468e-02  -7.148e-04  
076/01  6.402e-04  -0.2457  -0.0928   3.630e-04  -1.975e-05  -1.614e-02   1.211e-03  -1.614e-02   5.795e-06  
077/03  6.405e-04  -0.2452  -0.0818  -8.819e-04   1.363e-03  -1.489e-02  -6.022e-04  -1.489e-02  -1.857e-03  
078/01  6.373e-04  -0.2422  -0.0712   3.185e-04   2.953e-04  -1.597e-02   1.503e-03  -1.597e-02  -5.463e-04  
079/01  6.406e-04  -0.2483  -0.1077  -1.405e-03   2.123e-03  -1.644e-02  -4.784e-04  -1.644e-02  -3.438e-03  
080/03  6.423e-04  -0.2519  -0.1326  -5.229e-04   1.167e-03  -1.599e-02  -9.524e-04  -1.599e-02  -2.326e-03  

081/01  6.659e-04  -0.2665   0.1716   1.169e-03  -1.941e-03  -7.454e-03   2.493e-03  -7.454e-03   1.358e-03  
082/01  6.391e-04  -0.2437  -0.0586  -7.560e-04   1.128e-03  -1.080e-02  -4.299e-04  -1.080e-02  -6.957e-04  
083/03  6.325e-04  -0.2389  -0.1253  -1.627e-03   2.118e-03  -1.077e-02  -4.437e-05  -1.077e-02  -1.030e-03  
084/01  6.978e-04  -0.3001   0.6100  -9.146e-04  -7.276e-04  -1.961e-03  -2.224e-04  -1.961e-03  -8.339e-04  
085/01  6.409e-04  -0.2494  -0.1284   3.033e-04   6.631e-05  -1.278e-02   8.381e-04  -1.278e-02  -1.290e-05  
086/02  5.783e-04  -0.2383  -0.1683  -1.219e-03   1.205e-03  -1.071e-02  -1.936e-03  -1.071e-02  -1.452e-03  
087/01  5.791e-04  -0.2401  -0.1916  -3.827e-04   2.949e-04  -1.328e-02  -1.777e-04  -1.328e-02  -6.686e-04  
088/01  5.565e-04  -0.2138  -0.1578  -1.206e-03   1.926e-03  -1.240e-02  -1.508e-03  -1.240e-02  -1.179e-03  
089/03  5.177e-04  -0.1783  -0.2455  -9.707e-04   3.547e-03  -1.397e-02  -7.403e-04  -1.397e-02  -1.590e-03  
090/01  5.726e-04  -0.2337  -0.1819  -6.584e-04   7.412e-04  -1.344e-02   6.538e-05  -1.344e-02  -2.790e-04  
 
 
 










































                                   Appendix 2.C

          US-Repeat Hydrography(GO-SHIP) P16S: Bottle Quality Comments

Comments from the Sample Logs and the results of STS/ODF's data investigations 
are included in this report. The sample number is the cast number times 100 plus 
the bottle number. Investigation of data may include comparison of bottle 
salinity and oxygen data with CTD data, review of data plots of the station 
profile and adjoining stations, and re-reading of peaks (i.e. nutrients). 

Sample Quality 

 Stn  No.  Property  Code  Comment 
----  ---  --------  ----  -----------------------------------------------------
 1/2  202  bottle      9   Bottle tripped for deep-water nutrient check. 
 1/2  204  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
 1/2  205  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
 1/2  207  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
 1/2  208  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
 1/2  216  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
 1/2  228  bottle      2   Bottle loose. 
 2/1  103  bottle      3   SAMPLE LOG: "Large leak". O-ring unseated from top 
                           end cap. 
 2/1  108  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
 2/1  109  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
 3/1  101  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
 3/1  109  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
 3/1  110  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
 3/1  111  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
 3/1  115  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
 3/1  116  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
 3/1  117  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
 3/1  129  no2         4   Mis-trip 
 3/1  129  no3         4   Mis-trip 
 3/1  129  o2          4   O2 is 57 umol/kg high vs. CTDO profile, mis-trip. 
 3/1  129  po4         4   Mis-trip 
 3/1  129  salt        4   Mis-trip 
 3/1  129  sio3        4   Mis-trip 
 3/1  131  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
 4/3  301  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
 4/3  329  bottle      5   Bottle did not trip. Carousel trigger stuck. 
 4/3  329  reft        4   SBE35 did not equilibrate. Note bottle trip issue. 
 4/3  332  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
 5/3  314  salt        4   Mis-sampled. Drawn from 12. 
 5/3  332  bottle      9   Niskin 32 did not close. Bottom end cap hung up in 
                           bottom lanyard of niskin 31. 
 6/1  103  bottle      4   Sample Log: "Niskin 3 is leaking". Top cap O-ring was 
                           unseated. 
 6/1  103  no2         4   Sample bad, see other parameters. 
 6/1  103  no3         4   Sample bad, see other parameters. 
 6/1  103  o2          4   O2 value 5umol/kg low. Niskin leaking. 
 6/1  103  po4         4   Sample bad, see other parameters. 
 6/1  103  salt        4   Mis-Sampled 
 6/1  103  sio3        4   Silicate value high. 
 6/1  104  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
 6/1  114  salt        4   Mis-sampled. Drawn from Niskin 11. 
 6/1  132  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
 7/1  101  salt        3   
 7/1  103  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
 7/1  104  salt        3   
 7/1  114  salt        3   
 7/1  115  salt        3   
 7/1  118  salt        3   
 7/1  121  o2          5   O2 titration flat-lined at 1.7v,noend point; sample 
                           lost.  
 8/1  114  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
 8/1  133  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
 9/1  105  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
 9/1  114  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
 9/1  124  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
 9/1  125  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
 9/1  129  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
10/1  114  salt        3   
10/1  131  reft        3   Unstable temperatures. 
11/1  109  salt        3   
11/1  114  salt        3   
11/1  117  o2          3   O2 value 3 umol/kg low, sio3 also slightly low; 
                           similar to btl 18 values. 
                            
11/1  117  salt        3   
11/1  117  sio3        3   SiO3 value lower than expected, no analytical errors 
                           noted.  
11/1  131  bottle      3   "Niskin 31 has no seal". Vent was tight, top appeared 
                           to be seated correctly. 
12/1  114  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
12/1  131  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
13/1  101  salt        3   
13/1  103  salt        3   
13/1  114  salt        3   
13/1  119  salt        3   
13/1  122  po4         3   PO4 value lower than expected, no analytical errors 
                           noted.    
13/1  129  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
13/1  131  o2          2   Low battery on o2 thermometer starting niskin 31. 
                           Readings ok.    
14/1  114  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
15/1  110  bottle      2   Niskin 10 is leaking at spigot before venting: vent 
                           tight, tried resealing top lid. JKC: no obvious 
                           reason. 
15/1  117  o2          2   Bottle o2 matches upcast feature not seen on 
                           downcast. 
15/1  126  o2          2   Bottle o2 matches upcast feature not seen on 
                           downcast. 
15/1  132  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
16/1  123  o2          2   Bottle o2 matches upcast feature not seen on 
                           downcast. 
16/1  128  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 

16/1  132  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
17/2  201  salt        4   Mis-sample from bottle 3. 
17/2  217  o2          2   Bottle o2 matches upcast feature not seen on 
                           downcast. 
17/2  218  o2          2   Bottle o2 matches upcast feature not seen on 
                           downcast. 
17/2  231  reft        3   Unstable temperatures. 
17/2  235  bottle      9   Niskin 35 did not trip; no obvious reason why. JKC: 
                           sticky carousel latch, disassembled and cleaned. 
18/1  106  salt        4   Conductivity cell not completely filled during 
                           analysis. 
18/1  109  bottle      3   Niskin 9 leaking because vent knob was not closed 
                           properly. 
18/1  120  o2          2   Bottle o2 matches upcast feature not seen on 
                           downcast. 
18/1  124  o2          2   Bottle o2 matches upcast feature, similar feature 
                           deeper on downcast. 
18/1  132  reft        3   Unstable temperatures. 
18/1  132  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
19/1  131  bottle      3   Slight leak. O-ring not seated correctly in top end 
                           cap.   
22/1  129  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
22/1  132  reft        3   Unstable temperatures. 
23/1  133  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
25/1  107  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
25/1  117  bottle      3   Bottle leak. Top o-ring not seated correctly. 
25/1  121  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
25/1  122  salt        5   Salinity sample 22 lost. 
26/1  110  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
27/1  104  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
27/1  122  salt        4   Sample 22 was drawn from niskin 23. 
27/1  131  reft        2   Unstable temperatures. 
27/1  132  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
28/1  122  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
29/1  109  bottle      3   Niskin 9 leak. Vent left slightly open. 
29/1  123  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
29/1  131  bottle      3   Niskin 31 leak. O-ring not seated correctly. 
30/1  133  reft        2   SBE35 not equilibrated. Not used in fit. 
31/1  122  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
31/1  132  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
31/1  132  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
31/1  133  salt        4   Analytical error. 
32/1  124  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
32/1  130  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
33/1  121  o2          5   O2 UV detector a/d disconnected after sample switched 
                           to plot mode. Sample lost. USB connector re-seated in 
                           laptop, solved the problem for the rest of the run. 
33/1  134  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
34/1  101  ctdc2       4   This plumb line went bad. Replaced pump and cables 
                           after cast. 
34/1  102  ctdc2       4   This plumb line went bad. Replaced pump and cables 
                           after cast. 
34/1  103  ctdc2       4   This plumb line went bad. Replaced pump and cables 
                           after cast. 
34/1  104  ctdc2       4   This plumb line went bad. Replaced pump and cables 
                           after cast. 
34/1  105  ctdc2       4   This plumb line went bad. Replaced pump and cables 
                           after cast. 
34/1  109  ctdc2       4   This plumb line went bad. Replaced pump and cables 
                           after cast. 
34/1  114  reft        3   Unstable temperatures. 
35/1  101  ctdc2       4   This plumb line was noisy on upcast. Replaced cables 
                           and pumps after cast. 
35/1  103  ctdc2       4   This plumb line was noisy on upcast. Replaced cables 
                           and pumps after cast. 
35/1  104  ctdc2       4   This plumb line was noisy on upcast. Replaced cables 
                           and pumps after cast. 
35/1  105  ctdc2       4   This plumb line was noisy on upcast. Replaced cables 
                           and pumps after cast. 
35/1  106  ctdc2       4   This plumb line was noisy on upcast. Replaced cables 
                           and pumps after cast. 
35/1  107  ctdc2       4   This plumb line was noisy on upcast. Replaced cables 
                           and pumps after cast. 
35/1  117  ctdc2       4   This plumb line was noisy on upcast. Replaced cables 
                           and pumps after cast. 
35/1  118  ctdc2       4   This plumb line was noisy on upcast. Replaced cables 
                           and pumps after cast. 
35/1  119  ctdc2       4   This plumb line was noisy on upcast. Replaced cables 
                           and pumps after cast. 
35/1  119  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
35/1  120  ctdc2       4   This plumb line was noisy on upcast. Replaced cables 
                           and pumps after cast. 

35/1  121  ctdc2       4   This plumb line was noisy on upcast. Replaced cables 
                           and pumps after cast. 
35/1  122  ctdc2       4   This plumb line was noisy on upcast. Replaced cables 
                           and pumps after cast. 
35/1  123  ctdc2       4   This plumb line was noisy on upcast. Replaced cables 
                           and pumps after cast. 

35/1  124  ctdc2       4   This plumb line was noisy on upcast. Replaced cables 
                           and pumps after cast. 
36/1  119  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
36/1  132  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
37/2  216  bottle      2   Bottle 16 vent not closed properly. No leak. No 
                           analytical issues noted. 
37/2  228  bottle      2   Bottle 28 vent not closed properly. No leak. No 
                           analytical issues noted. 
37/2  230  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
38/1  117  salt        4   Mis-sampled from bottle 16. 
39/3  301  o2          2   Voltage a bit high for this sample, but value is 
                           fine. 
39/3  302  o2          2   Replaced flask 1762 (box W) after station run. 
                           Cracked rim and label falling off-did not affect 
                           sample. 
39/3  308  o2          3   O2 value is 4 umol/kg high vs. CTDO and nearby casts. 
                           Nutrients are in line. 
40/2  230  reft        3   Unstable temperatures. 
41/1  133  reft        3   Unstable temperatures. 
42/1  108  bottle      2   Bottle 8 vent not closed properly. 
42/1  110  bottle      2   Green paint on bottle 10 nozzle. 
42/1  133  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
44/1  119  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
44/1  134  reft        3   Unstable temperatures. 
45/1  131  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
45/1  131  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
45/1  132  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
46/1  120  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
46/1  132  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
47/1  121  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
47/1  135  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
48/3  314  no2         4   Mis-sampled, likely from bottle 16. 
48/3  314  no3         4   Mis-sampled, likely from bottle 16. 
48/3  314  po4         4   Mis-sampled, likely from bottle 16. 
48/3  314  salt        4   Mis-sampled, likely from bottle 16. 
48/3  314  sio3        4   Mis-sampled, likely from bottle 16. 
48/3  331  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
49/1  108  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
49/1  112  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
50/1  120  no2         4   Mis-sampled, likely from bottle 19. 
50/1  120  no3         4   Mis-sampled, likely from bottle 19. 
50/1  120  po4         4   Mis-sampled, likely from bottle 19. 
50/1  120  sio3        4   Mis-sampled, likely from bottle 19. 
51/3  317  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
51/3  331  reft        3   Unstable temperatures. 
51/3  332  reft        3   Unstable temperatures. 
52/1  124  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
52/1  131  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
52/1  133  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
53/1  126  o2          2   correct typo 
53/1  127  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
53/1  130  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
53/1  131  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
53/1  132  reft        3   Unstable temperatures. 
53/1  136  o2          5   Analytical error, sample lost. 
56/2  212  o2          4   Bottle o2 4 umol/kg high vs. CTDO. 
56/2  224  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
56/2  231  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
56/2  232  reft        4   Required wait time for SBE35 equilibration was not 
                           observed.       
56/2  233  reft        3   Unstable temperatures. 
57/1  112  bottle      4   Mis-trip. See parameters. 
57/1  112  no2         4   Mis-trip 
57/1  112  no3         4   Mis-trip 
57/1  112  o2          4   O2 does not fit profile or CTD, Mis-trip. 
57/1  112  po4         4   Mis-trip 
57/1  112  salt        4   Mis-trip 
57/1  112  sio3        4   Mis-trip 
57/1  131  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
57/1  134  reft        3   Unstable temperatures. 
57/1  134  salt        4   Contaminated sample. 
58/3  333  reft        3   Unstable temperatures. 
59/1  110  bottle      3   Niskin 10 top cap was not secure, CFC and carbon 
                           samples skipped. 
59/1  112  bottle      2   Niskin 12 bottom cap could close after cocking for 
                           next station; adjusted lanyard guide ring up to take 
                           up excess lanyard before station 60. This may have 
                           affected some previous casts. 
59/1  120  reft        3   Unstable temperatures. 
59/1  128  bottle      3   Niskin 28 top vent was not fully closed, CFC and 
                           carbon samples skipped. 
59/1  129  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
59/1  131  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
60/1  128  salt        2   Suppression switch too low. 
60/1  129  salt        2   Suppression switch too low. 
60/1  130  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
60/1  131  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
60/1  131  salt        2   Suppression switch too low. 
60/1  133  salt        2   Suppression switch too low. 
60/1  134  salt        2   Suppression switch too low. 
60/1  135  salt        2   Suppression switch too low. 
60/1  136  salt        2   Suppression switch too low. 
61/1  110  bottle      3   Bottle leak. See other parameters. 
61/1  110  no2         4   Bottle leak 
61/1  110  no3         4   Bottle leak. 
61/1  110  o2          4   Bottle value does not fit profile 
61/1  110  po4         4   Bottle leak. 
61/1  110  salt        4   Bottle leak. 
61/1  110  sio3        4   Bottle leak. 
61/1  129  reft        3   Unstable temperatures. 
61/1  133  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
62/1  101  o2          3   bottom o2 value 2 umol/kg high vs. CTDO and nearby 
                           casts. 
62/1  110  bottle      4   Bottle leak. See other parameters. Fixed after cast. 
62/1  110  no2         4   Bottle leak 
62/1  110  no3         4   Bottle leak. 
62/1  110  o2          4   Bottle value does not fit profile. 
62/1  110  po4         4   Bottle leak. 
62/1  110  salt        4   Bottle leak. 
62/1  110  sio3        4   Bottle leak. 
62/1  115  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
62/1  119  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
62/1  128  reft        3   Unstable temperatures. 
62/1  129  salt        2   Suppression switch too low. 
62/1  130  salt        2   Suppression switch too low. 
62/1  131  salt        2   Suppression switch too low. 
62/1  132  salt        2   Suppression switch too low. 
62/1  133  reft        3   Unstable temperatures. 
62/1  133  salt        2   Suppression switch too low. 
62/1  134  salt        2   Suppression switch too low. 
62/1  135  salt        2   Suppression switch too low. 
62/1  136  salt        2   Suppression switch too low. 
64/1  117  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
64/1  120  reft        3   Unstable temperatures. 
64/1  126  reft        3   Unstable temperatures. 
64/1  128  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
64/1  129  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
65/1  107  bottle      4   O2 Draw temp high, bottle o2 does not fit profile, 
                           Mis-trip.      
65/1  107  no2         4   Mis-trip 
65/1  107  no3         4   Mis-trip 
65/1  107  o2          4   Bottle o2 does not fit profile, mis-trip. 
65/1  107  po4         4   Mis-trip 
65/1  107  salt        4   Mis-trip 
65/1  107  sio3        4   Mis-trip 
65/1  120  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
65/1  127  o2          5   Analytical error, sample lost 
65/1  129  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
65/1  131  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
65/1  133  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
66/2  203  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
66/2  225  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
66/2  228  reft        3   Unstable temperature. 
66/2  232  reft        3   Unstable temperatures. 
66/2  233  reft        3   Unstable temperatures. 
66/2  234  bottle      2   Spigot pushed in (not leaking). 
67/1  101  ph          2   pH redo after total alkalinity on niskin 1. 
67/1  101  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
67/1  131  o2          5   Forgot to add stir bar, too much thio to recover with 
                           OT. Sample lost. 
67/1  133  reft        3   Unstable temperatures. 
69/1  126  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
69/1  132  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
70/1  107  bottle      9   Niskin 7 did not close; JKC removed and checked latch, 
                           no problem found; bottle shifted higher before next 
                           cast. 
70/1  116  bottle      9   Niskin 16 did not close; JKC removed and checked 
                           latch, no problem found; bottle shifted higher before 
                           next cast. 
70/1  118  o2          5   Forgot to add stir bar, too much thio to recover with 
                           OT. Sample lost. 
71/1  116  reft        3   Unstable temperatures 
71/1  123  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
71/1  129  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
72/1  123  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
73/1  121  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
74/2  222  reft        3   Unstable temperatures. 
74/2  233  reft        2   Unstable temperatures.. 
75/1  134  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
76/1  130  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
76/1  132  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
77/3  322  salt        4   Mis-sampled 
77/3  324  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
78/1  107  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
78/1  126  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
79/1  131  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
79/1  133  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
80/3  309  doc         2   Nutrient jumped ahead of DOC in sampling and 
                           contaminated nozzle with hand. 
80/3  325  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
80/3  326  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
80/3  331  o2          2   O2 thermocouple meter change out to thermistor for 
                           Niskin 31 to 36. 
81/1  101  bottle      4   Bottom o2 value similar to bottle 103, nutrients as 
                           well. Appears to be a mis-trip. 
81/1  101  no2         4   Mis-trip 
81/1  101  no3         4   Mis-trip 
81/1  101  o2          4   Bottle o2 6 umol/kg low vs CTDO, apparent mis-trip near  
                           same depth as niskin 3. 
81/1  101  po4         4   Mis-trip 
81/1  101  salt        4   Mis-trip. See other parameters. 
81/1  101  sio3        4   Mis-trip 
81/1  112  o2          2   O2 temps jump 4 degrees between 11/12, drop back 1 
                           degree between 16/17. "slow" backup therm read 
                           similarly high on bottle 12, so continued to use 
                           half-fast therm for entire sampling. Check umol/kg 
                           conversion after analysis come in. 
81/1  113  o2          2   O2 temps jump 4 degrees between 11/12, drop back 1 
                           degree between 16/17. "slow" backup therm read 
                           similarly high on bottle 12, so continued to use 
                           half-fast therm for entire sampling. Check umol/kg 
                           conversion after analysis come in. 
81/1  114  o2          2   O2 temps jump 4 degrees between 11/12, drop back 1 
                           degree between 16/17. "slow" backup therm read 
                           similarly high on bottle 12, so continued to use 
                           half-fast therm for entire sampling. Check umol/kg 
                           conversion after analysis come in. 
81/1  115  o2          2   O2 temps jump 4 degrees between 11/12, drop back 1 
                           degree between 16/17. "slow" backup therm read 
                           similarly high on bottle 12, so continued to use 
                           half-fast therm for entire sampling. Check umol/kg 
                           conversion after analysis come in. 
81/1  116  o2          2   O2 temps jump 4 degrees between 11/12, drop back 1 
                           degree between 16/17. "slow" backup therm read 
                           similarly high on bottle 12, so continued to use 
                           half-fast therm for entire sampling. Check umol/kg 
                           conversion after analysis come in. 
81/1  123  ctdc2       4   TC duct displaced. 
81/1  124  reft        3   Unstable temperatures. 
81/1  126  reft        3   Unstable temperatures. 
81/1  128  ctdc2       4   TC duct displaced. 
81/1  133  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
82/1  115  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
82/1  126  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
83/3  316  bottle      2   While prepping rosette, CTD watch noted vent knob had 
                           sheared from shaft. 
83/3  317  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
83/3  324  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
83/3  326  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
83/3  331  bottle      3   "#31 is leaker." Bottle leaking water on deck. O-ring 
                           reseated. 
83/3  331  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
83/3  335  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
84/1  118  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
84/1  123  reft        3   Unstable temperatures. 
84/1  129  reft        3   Unstable temperatures. 
85/1  102  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
85/1  121  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
85/1  124  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 

85/1  134  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
86/2  213  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
86/2  224  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
86/2  225  reft        3   Unstable temperatures. 
86/2  226  po4         4   Value much higher than expected, suspect sampling 
                           contamination.          
86/2  233  reft        3   Unstable temperatures. 
87/1  114  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
87/1  117  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
87/1  123  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
87/1  125  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
87/1  128  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
87/1  129  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
87/1  133  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
88/1  107  bottle      9   Niskin bottom end-cap did not close until it was on 
                           deck; empty. 
88/1  124  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
88/1  127  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
88/1  128  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
88/1  132  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
89/3  321  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
89/3  321  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
89/3  323  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
89/3  324  reft        3   Unstable temperatures.. 
89/3  327  reft        3   Unstable temperatures.. 
89/3  328  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
89/3  330  reft        3   SBE35 did not equilibrate. 
89/3  333  salt        3   Salinity value does not fit profile. 
90/1  106  salt        5   Salinity sample dropped during analysis. Sample lost. 
           

















































                                       Appendix 2.D

      US-Repeat Hydrography(GO-SHIP) P16S: Pre-Cruise Sensor Laboratory Calibrations

                                    Table of Contents

Instrument/                   Manufacturer         Serial        Station  Appendix D Page
Sensor                        and Model No.        Number        Number   (Un-Numbered) 
----------------------------  -------------------  ------------  -------  ---------------
PRESS (Pressure)              Digiquartz 401K-105  831-99677      1-90            1 
T1 (Temperature)              SBE3plus             03P-5046       1-14            2 
T1 (Temperature)              SBE3plus             03P-4953       15-90           3 
T2 (Secondary Temperature)    SBE3plus             03P-4953       1-14            3 
T2 (Secondary Temperature)    SBE3plus             03P-5046       15-27           2 
T2 (Secondary Temperature)    SBE3plus             03P-4213       28-90           4 
REFT (Reference Temperature)  SBE35                3528706-0035   1-90            5 
C1 (Conductivity)             SBE4C                04-3429        1-90            6 
C2 (Secondary Conductivity)   SBE4C                04-3057        1-14            7 
C2 (Secondary Conductivity)   SBE4C                04-2115        15-90           8 
O2 (Dissolved Oxygen)         SBE43                43-1138        1-34            9 
O2 (Dissolved Oxygen)         SBE43                43-0185        35-85          10 
O2 (Dissolved Oxygen)         SBE43                43-1071        86-90          11 
TRANS (Transmissometer)       WET Labs C-Star      CST-1636DR     1-90           12 



                           Pressure Calibration Report
                           STS/ODF Calibration Facility


SENSOR SERIAL NUMBER: 0831 
CALIBRATION DATE: 02-JAN-2014 
Mfg: SEABIRD Model: 09P CTD Prs s/n: 99677 

C1= -4.346374E+4 
C2= -3.002636E-1 
C3= 1.123365E-2 
D1= 3.308025E-2 
D2= 0.000000E+0 
T1= 3.004621E+1 
T2= -4.407214E-4 
T3= 3.664094E-6 
T4= 1.262619E-8 
T5= 0.000000E+0 
AD590M= 1.28916E-2 
AD590B= -8.23481E+0 
Slope = 1.00000000E+0 
Offset = 0.00000000E+0 

Calibration Standard: Mfg: RUSKA Model: 2400 s/n: 34336 

t0=t1+t2*td+t3*td*td+t4*td*td*td 

w = 1-t0*t0*f*f 

Pressure = (0.6894759*((c1+c2*td+c3*td*td)*w*(1-(d1+d2*td)*w)-14.7) 



                                Standard-   Standard-
Sensor     Standard  Sensor     Sensor      Sensor     Sensor_Temp  Bath_Temp 
Output               New_Coefs  Prev_Coefs  NEW_Coefs 
---------  --------  ---------  ----------  ---------  -----------  ---------
33295.357     0.16       0.34      -0.26      -0.19        18.25      16.724 
33497.066   364.95     364.83       0.04       0.12        18.25      16.725 
33686.299   709.13     709.05       0.00       0.08        18.25      16.726 
33874.342  1053.30    1053.28      -0.06       0.02        18.25      16.727 
34061.220  1397.56    1397.54      -0.05       0.02        18.25      16.728 
34431.523  2086.04    2086.06      -0.10      -0.02        18.27      16.729 
34797.353  2774.57    2774.62      -0.12      -0.05        18.27      16.730 
35158.859  3463.19    3463.21      -0.09      -0.02        18.28      16.731 
35516.144  4151.89    4151.79       0.04       0.11        18.30      16.732 
35158.883  3463.19    3463.24      -0.13      -0.05        18.30      16.733 
34797.385  2774.57    2774.66      -0.17      -0.09        18.30      16.734 
34431.557  2086.04    2086.10      -0.15      -0.07        18.30      16.735 
34061.253  1397.56    1397.57      -0.09      -0.01        18.30      16.736 
33874.365  1053.30    1053.29      -0.07       0.01        18.30      16.736 
33686.331   709.13     709.08      -0.02       0.06        18.30      16.737 
33497.099   364.95     364.86       0.02       0.09        18.30      16.738 
33291.944     0.16       0.40      -0.34      -0.24         8.94       7.262 
33493.627   364.95     364.88      -0.04       0.07         8.94       7.262 
33682.820   709.12     709.06      -0.06       0.07         8.94       7.260 
33870.815  1053.29    1053.24      -0.08       0.05         8.94       7.260 
34057.683  1397.55    1397.52      -0.11       0.03         8.94       7.259 
34427.932  2086.01    2086.02      -0.16      -0.00         8.94       7.259 
34793.722  2774.55    2774.58      -0.19      -0.03         8.94       7.259 
35155.187  3463.17    3463.17      -0.18      -0.00         8.94       7.259 
35512.438  4151.85    4151.76      -0.10       0.09         8.94       7.259 
35865.672  4840.60    4840.48      -0.08       0.11         8.94       7.258 
36215.116  5529.40    5529.55      -0.35      -0.15         8.94       7.258 
35865.683  4840.60    4840.51      -0.10       0.09         8.94       7.258 
35512.467  4151.85    4151.82      -0.16       0.03         8.93       7.257 
35155.208  3463.17    3463.23      -0.24      -0.06         8.92       7.257 
34793.744  2774.55    2774.63      -0.25      -0.08         8.91       7.256 
34427.959  2086.02    2086.09      -0.22      -0.07         8.91       7.256 
34057.695  1397.55    1397.56      -0.15      -0.01         8.91       7.256 
33870.827  1053.29    1053.28      -0.12       0.01         8.91       7.255 
33682.826   709.13     709.09      -0.08       0.03         8.91       7.255 
33493.622   364.95     364.89      -0.05       0.06         8.91       7.255 
33287.889     0.16       0.41      -0.32      -0.25        -0.06      -1.545 
33489.555   364.95     364.87      -0.01       0.08        -0.05      -1.544 
33678.734   709.13     709.06      -0.03       0.07        -0.05      -1.543 
33866.722  1053.30    1053.25      -0.07       0.05        -0.05      -1.542 
34053.564  1397.56    1397.51      -0.08       0.05        -0.05      -1.542 
34423.796  2086.03    2086.03      -0.15      -0.00        -0.04      -1.541 
34789.557  2774.57    2774.57      -0.17      -0.00        -0.03      -1.540 
35150.978  3463.19    3463.14      -0.14       0.05        -0.02      -1.539 
35508.222  4151.88    4151.78      -0.09       0.11        -0.02      -1.538 
35861.439  4840.63    4840.52      -0.11       0.11        -0.02      -1.537 
36210.794  5529.44    5529.47      -0.26      -0.03        -0.02      -1.536 
36556.272  6218.32    6218.36      -0.27      -0.04        -0.02      -1.535 
36897.941  6907.25    6907.10      -0.10       0.15        -0.02      -1.533 
36556.311  6218.32    6218.44      -0.35      -0.12        -0.02      -1.533 
36210.846  5529.44    5529.56      -0.36      -0.12        -0.02      -1.532 
35861.505  4840.63    4840.64      -0.23      -0.01        -0.02      -1.532 
35508.296  4151.88    4151.91      -0.23      -0.03        -0.02      -1.531 
35151.056  3463.20    3463.28      -0.27      -0.08        -0.02      -1.530 
34789.609  2774.58    2774.66      -0.26      -0.09        -0.02      -1.530 
34423.842  2086.04    2086.08      -0.20      -0.04        -0.01      -1.529 
34053.609  1397.56    1397.55      -0.12       0.01        -0.01      -1.528 
33866.769  1053.30    1053.29      -0.11       0.01         0.00      -1.528 
33678.775   709.13     709.08      -0.06       0.05         0.01      -1.527 
33489.586   364.95     364.88      -0.02       0.07         0.01      -1.526 
33298.399     0.16       0.32      -0.33      -0.16        29.56      28.318 
33500.146   364.95     364.82      -0.03       0.13        29.57      28.318 
33689.412   709.13     709.04      -0.06       0.09        29.59      28.319 
33877.483  1053.30    1053.26      -0.11       0.04        29.60      28.319 
34064.406  1397.55    1397.55      -0.13       0.01        29.61      28.320 
34434.756  2086.03    2086.05      -0.15      -0.03        29.62      28.320 
34800.653  2774.56    2774.63      -0.16      -0.07        29.63      28.321 
35162.198  3463.19    3463.20      -0.09      -0.01        29.64      28.322 
35519.515  4151.88    4151.73       0.10       0.14        29.66      28.323 
35162.219  3463.19    3463.23      -0.12      -0.04        29.67      28.324 
34800.683  2774.56    2774.67      -0.20      -0.11        29.67      28.325 
34434.784  2086.03    2086.08      -0.17      -0.05        29.68      28.326 
34064.436  1397.56    1397.57      -0.15      -0.01        29.69      28.327 
33877.506  1053.30    1053.26      -0.12       0.03        29.70      28.328 
33689.451   709.13     709.06      -0.09       0.07        29.71      28.329 
33500.182   364.95     364.83      -0.04       0.12        29.72      28.330 
33298.435     0.16       0.32      -0.34      -0.17        29.73      28.331 
 
































                          Temperature Calibration Report
                           STS/ODF Calibration Facility

SENSOR SERIAL NUMBER: 5046 
CALIBRATION DATE: 07-Jan-2014 
Mfg: SEABIRD Model: 03 
Previous cal: 20-Aug-13 
Calibration Tech: CAL 

ITS-90_COEFFICIENTS  IPTS-68_COEFFICIENTS 
                     ITS-T90 

g = 4.41730139E-3 a = 4.41751937E-3 
h = 6.45937577E-4 b = 6.46153852E-4 
i = 2.37505541E-5 c = 2.37831272E-5 
j = 2.31036294E-6 d = 2.31187244E-6 
f0 = 1000.0 Slope = 1.0 Offset = 0.0 

Calibration Standard: Mfg: ASL Model: F18 s/n: 245-5149 

Temperature ITS-90 = 1/{g+h[ln(f0/f )]+i[ln2(f0/f)]+j[ln3(f0/f)]} - 273.15 (°C) 

Temperature IPTS-68 = 1/{a+b[ln(f0/f )]+c[ln2(f0/f)]+d[ln3(f0/f)]} - 273.15 (°C) 

T68 = 1.00024 * T90 (-2 to -35 Deg C) 

                     SBE3     SPRT     SBE3  SPRT-SBE3  SPRT-SBE3 
                     Freq  ITS-T90  ITS-T90  OLD_Coefs  NEW_Coefs 
                ---------  -------  -------  ---------  ---------
                3274.4722  -1.4609  -1.4610   0.00042    0.00010 
                3463.4980   1.0410   1.0412   0.00027   -0.00013 
                3741.2316   4.5443   4.5444   0.00040   -0.00004 
                4034.6519   8.0480   8.0480   0.00046    0.00005 
                4344.2531  11.5529  11.5528   0.00040    0.00005 
                4669.5436  15.0493  15.0493   0.00024   -0.00003 
                5012.6414  18.5558  18.5559   0.00017   -0.00001 
                5372.7964  22.0605  22.0603   0.00025    0.00014 
                5750.2992  25.5623  25.5624  -0.00004   -0.00010 
                6145.7028  29.0641  29.0641  -0.00002   -0.00009 
                6559.6169  32.5680  32.5679   0.00021    0.00007 

















                          Temperature Calibration Report
                           STS/ODF Calibration Facility

SENSOR SERIAL NUMBER: 4953 
CALIBRATION DATE: 07-Jan-2014 
Mfg: SEABIRD Model: 03 
Previous cal: 30-Jul-13 
Calibration Tech: CAL 

ITS-90_COEFFICIENTS  IPTS-68_COEFFICIENTS 
                     ITS-T90 
g = 4.36142499E-3    a = 4.36162472E-3 
h = 6.31196043E-4    b = 6.31403988E-4 
i = 1.99805635E-5    c = 2.00117066E-5 
j = 1.40393039E-6    d = 1.40528736E-6 
f0 = 1000.0          Slope = 1.0 Offset = 0.0 

Calibration Standard: Mfg: ASL Model: F18 s/n: 245-5149 

Temperature ITS-90 = 1/{g+h[ln(f0/f )]+i[ln2(f0/f)]+j[ln3(f0/f)]} - 273.15 (°C) 

Temperature IPTS-68 = 1/{a+b[ln(f0/f )]+c[ln2(f0/f)]+d[ln3(f0/f)]} - 273.15 (°C) 

T68 = 1.00024 * T90 (-2 to -35 Deg C) 

                     SBE3     SPRT     SBE3  SPRT-SBE3  SPRT-SBE3 
                     Freq  ITS-T90  ITS-T90  OLD_Coefs  NEW_Coefs 
                ---------  -------  -------  ---------  ---------
                3048.8242  -1.4609  -1.4611   0.00093    0.00019 
                3227.1230   1.0410   1.0412   0.00054   -0.00022 
                3489.3193   4.5443   4.5445   0.00058   -0.00014 
                3766.6180   8.0480   8.0480   0.00071    0.00005 
                4059.5444  11.5529  11.5528   0.00068    0.00012 
                4367.6831  15.0493  15.0492   0.00049    0.00005 
                4693.0918  18.5558  18.5558   0.00033   -0.00000 
                5035.1090  22.0605  22.0604   0.00031    0.00008 
                5394.0568  25.5623  25.5625   0.00000   -0.00015 
                5770.5254  29.0641  29.0642   0.00003   -0.00010 
                6165.1595  32.5680  32.5679   0.00025    0.00011 


















                          Temperature Calibration Report
                           STS/ODF Calibration Facility

SENSOR SERIAL NUMBER: 4213 
CALIBRATION DATE: 02-Jan-2014 
Mfg: SEABIRD Model: 03 
Previous cal: 20-Aug-13 
Calibration Tech: CAL 

ITS-90_COEFFICIENTS  IPTS-68_COEFFICIENTS 
                     ITS-T90 
-------------------  -------------------------------
g = 4.32186185E-3    a = 4.32204860E-3 
h = 6.25984057E-4    b = 6.26187083E-4 
i = 1.97785170E-5    c = 1.98090679E-5 
j = 1.52992507E-6    d = 1.53126321E-6 
f0 = 1000.0          Slope = 1.0        Offset = 0.0 

Calibration Standard: Mfg: ASL Model: F18 s/n: 245-5149 

Temperature ITS-90 = 1/{g+h[ln(f0/f )]+i[ln2(f0/f)]+j[ln3(f0/f)]} - 273.15 (°C) 

Temperature IPTS-68 = 1/{a+b[ln(f0/f )]+c[ln2(f0/f)]+d[ln3(f0/f)]} - 273.15 (°C) 

T68 = 1.00024 * T90 (-2 to -35 Deg C) 


                     SBE3     SPRT     SBE3  SPRT-SBE3  SPRT-SBE3 
                     Freq  ITS-T90  ITS-T90  OLD_Coefs  NEW_Coefs 
                ---------  -------  -------  ---------  ---------
                2876.7902  -1.4610  -1.4610   0.00025    0.00000 
                3045.8353   1.0421   1.0421   0.00014    0.00000 
                3294.3018   4.5439   4.5440  -0.00002   -0.00002 
                3557.2866   8.0480   8.0480  -0.00005    0.00005 
                3835.1349  11.5529  11.5530  -0.00024   -0.00007 
                4127.4919  15.0499  15.0498  -0.00017    0.00005 
                4436.2710  18.5566  18.5566  -0.00024    0.00002 
                4760.6823  22.0593  22.0594  -0.00031   -0.00003 
                5101.5675  25.5633  25.5633  -0.00037   -0.00010 
                5458.9798  29.0655  29.0654  -0.00014    0.00013 
                5833.6458  32.5690  32.5691  -0.00027   -0.00004 
















                          Temperature Calibration Report
                           STS/ODF Calibration Facility

SENSOR SERIAL NUMBER: 0035 
CALIBRATION DATE: 15-Jan-2014 
Mfg: SEABIRD Model: 35 
Previous cal: 18-Jun-13 
Calibration Tech: CAL 

ITS-90_COEFFICIENTS 
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
a0 =    3.927281381E-3 
a1 =   -1.037150759E-3 
a2 =    1.634334722E-4 
a3 =   -9.184815311E-6 
a4 =    1.986797340E-7 
Slope = 1.000000 Offset = 0.000000 

Calibration Standard: Mfg: ASL Model: F18 s/n: 245-5149 

Calibration Standard: Mfg: ASL Model: F18 s/n: 245-5149 

Temperature ITS-90 = 1/{a0+a1[ln(f )]+a2[ln2(f)]+a3[ln3(f)]+a4[ln4(f)} - 273.15 (°C) 


                       SBE3     SPRT     SBE3  SPRT-SBE3  SPRT-SBE3 
                      Count  ITS-T90  ITS-T90  OLD_Coefs  NEW_Coefs 
                -----------  -------  -------  ---------  ---------
                657640.1765  -1.4583  -1.4584  -0.00001    0.00004 
                589381.1624   1.0431   1.0432  -0.00010   -0.00006 
                506707.0552   4.5463   4.5464  -0.00007   -0.00003 
                436795.5730   8.0507   8.0506   0.00003    0.00007 
                377548.8988  11.5551  11.5551  -0.00001    0.00003 
                327329.4239  15.0512  15.0512  -0.00005   -0.00001 
                284422.2912  18.5581  18.5581  -0.00005   -0.00003 
                247847.5604  22.0594  22.0594  -0.00003   -0.00003 
                216504.1183  25.5646  25.5646   0.00005    0.00000 
                189632.1110  29.0664  29.0663   0.00016    0.00006 
                166499.1570  32.5698  32.5698   0.00013   -0.00003 


















                           Sea-Bird Electronics, Inc.

                13431 NE 20th Street, Bellevue, WA 98005-2010 USA

    Phone: (+1) 425-643-9866 Fax (+1) 425-643-9954 Email: seabird@seabird.com


SENSOR SERIAL NUMBER: 3429        SBE4 CONDUCTIVITY CALIBRATION DATA 
CALIBRATION DATE: 19-Nov-13       PSS 1978: C(35,15,0) = 4.2914 Seimens/meter 

GHIJ COEFFICIENTS                 ABCDM COEFFICIENTS 

g = -9.80394533e+000              a = 2.48339495e-006 
h = 1.50801204e+000               b = 1.50340843e+000 
i = -1.83800754e-003              c = -9.79511999e+000 
j = 2.29831365e-004               d = -8.25604584e-005 
CPcor = -9.5700e-008 (nominal)    m = 5.6 
CTcor = 3.2500e-006 (nominal)     CPcor = -9.5700e-008 (nominal) 


      BATH TEMP  BATH SAL   BATH COND   INST FREQ   INST COND     RESIDUAL
       (ITS-90)   (PSU)    (Siemens/m)    (kHz)    (Siemens/m)  (Siemens/m) 
      ---------  --------  -----------  ---------  -----------  -----------
        0.0000    0.0000     0.00000     2.55246     0.00000      0.00000 
       -1.0000   34.7448     2.79935     5.01216     2.79936      0.00001 
        1.0000   34.7455     2.97049     5.12428     2.97048     -0.00001 
       15.0000   34.7467     4.26398     5.90285     4.26396     -0.00001 
       18.5000   34.7459     4.61004     6.09419     4.61005      0.00002 
       29.0000   34.7444     5.69187     6.65652     5.69186     -0.00001 
       32.5001   34.7378     6.06386     6.83907     6.06386      0.00000 


                      2    3    4 
Conductivity = (g + hf + if + jf ) /10(1 + δt + εp) Siemens/meter 

                  m    2 
Conductivity = (af + bf + c + dt) / [10 (1 + εp) Siemens/meter 

t = temperature[°C)]; p = pressure[decibars]; δ = CTcor; ε = CPcor; 
Residual = (instrument conductivity -bath conductivity) using g, h, i, j coefficients 
















                           Sea-Bird Electronics, Inc.

                13431 NE 20th Street, Bellevue, WA 98005-2010 USA

    Phone: (+1) 425-643-9866 Fax (+1) 425-643-9954 Email: seabird@seabird.com


SENSOR SERIAL NUMBER: 3057        SBE4 CONDUCTIVITY CALIBRATION DATA 
CALIBRATION DATE: 19-Dec-13       PSS 1978: C(35,15,0) = 4.2914 Seimens/meter 

GHIJ COEFFICIENTS                 ABCDM COEFFICIENTS 
------------------------------    ------------------------------
g = -1.02044015e+001              a = 3.10846275e-004 
h = 1.28537138e+000               b = 1.28556745e+000 
i = 4.10065605e-004               c = -1.02046696e+001 
j = 2.58419169e-005               d = -8.53416924e-005 
CPcor = -9.5700e-008 (nominal)    m = 3.3 
CTcor = 3.2500e-006 (nominal)     CPcor = -9.5700e-008 (nominal) 


      BATH TEMP  BATH SAL   BATH COND   INST FREQ   INST COND     RESIDUAL
       (ITS-90)   (PSU)    (Siemens/m)    (kHz)    (Siemens/m)  (Siemens/m) 
      ---------  --------  -----------  ---------  -----------  -----------
        0.0000    0.0000     0.00000     2.81611     0.00000      0.00000 
       -1.0000   34.6232     2.79047     5.43869     2.79046     -0.00000 
        1.0000   34.6239     2.96108     5.55892     2.96107     -0.00002 
       15.0000   34.6233     4.25044     6.39466     4.25049      0.00006 
       18.5000   34.6229     4.59547     6.60024     4.59546     -0.00001 
       29.0000   34.6212     5.67395     7.20496     5.67387     -0.00008 
       32.5000   34.6145     6.04477     7.40149     6.04482      0.00005 


                      2    3    4 
Conductivity = (g + hf + if + jf ) /10(1 + δt + εp) Siemens/meter 

                  m    2 
Conductivity = (af + bf + c + dt) / [10 (1 + εp) Siemens/meter 

t = temperature[°C)]; p = pressure[decibars]; δ = CTcor; ε = CPcor; 
Residual = (instrument conductivity -bath conductivity) using g, h, i, j coefficients 
















                           Sea-Bird Electronics, Inc.

                13431 NE 20th Street, Bellevue, WA 98005-2010 USA

    Phone: (+1) 425-643-9866 Fax (+1) 425-643-9954 Email: seabird@seabird.com


SENSOR SERIAL NUMBER: 2115        SBE4 CONDUCTIVITY CALIBRATION DATA 
CALIBRATION DATE: 14-Dec-13       PSS 1978: C(35,15,0) = 4.2914 Seimens/meter 

GHIJ COEFFICIENTS                 ABCDM COEFFICIENTS 
------------------------------    ------------------------------
g = -9.88681014e+000              a = 1.34789425e-006 
h = 1.42958230e+000               b = 1.42507263e+000 
i = -1.74896449e-003              c = -9.87782542e+000 
j = 2.07715195e-004               d = -8.48856510e-005 
CPcor = -9.5700e-008 (nominal)    m = 5.8 
CTcor = 3.2500e-006 (nominal)     CPcor = -9.5700e-008 (nominal) 


      BATH TEMP  BATH SAL   BATH COND   INST FREQ   INST COND     RESIDUAL
       (ITS-90)   (PSU)    (Siemens/m)    (kHz)    (Siemens/m)  (Siemens/m) 
      ---------  --------  -----------  ---------  -----------  -----------
        0.0000    0.0000     0.00000     2.63272     0.00000      0.00000 
       -1.0000   34.7932     2.80289     5.15627     2.80288     -0.00001 
        1.0000   34.7931     2.97417     5.27139     2.97419      0.00002 
       15.0000   34.7944     4.26921     6.07098     4.26918     -0.00003 
       18.5000   34.7940     4.61573     6.26755     4.61574      0.00001 
       29.0000   34.7926     5.69887     6.84523     5.69891      0.00004 
       32.5001   34.7880     6.07162     7.03289     6.07160     -0.00003 


                      2    3    4 
Conductivity = (g + hf + if + jf ) /10(1 + δt + εp) Siemens/meter 

                  m    2 
Conductivity = (af + bf + c + dt) / [10 (1 + εp) Siemens/meter 

t = temperature[°C)]; p = pressure[decibars]; δ = CTcor; ε = CPcor; 
Residual = (instrument conductivity -bath conductivity) using g, h, i, j coefficients 
















                           Sea-Bird Electronics, Inc.

                13431 NE 20th Street, Bellevue, WA 98005-2010 USA

    Phone: (+1) 425-643-9866 Fax (+1) 425-643-9954 Email: seabird@seabird.com


SENSOR SERIAL NUMBER: 1138                 SBE 43 OXYGEN CALIBRATION DATA 
CALIBRATION DATE: 07-Dec-13 

COEFFICIENTS                               NOMINAL DYNAMIC COEFFICIENTS 
                      A = -3.5410e-003   
Soc = 0.4962          B = 1.6754e-004      D1 = 1.92634e-4      H1 = -3.30000e-2 
Voffset = -0.5213     C = -2.4783e-006     D2 = -4.64803e-2     H2 =  5.00000e+3 
Tau20 = 2.33          E nominal = 0.036                         H3 =  1.45000e+3 


      BATH OX  BATH TEMP  BATH SAL   INSTRUMENT     INSTRUMENT   RESIDUAL
       (ml/l)   ITS-90      PSU     OUTPUT(VOLTS)  OXYGEN(ml/l)   (ml/l) 
      -------  ---------  --------  -------------  ------------  --------
        1.37     2.00       0.00        0.807          1.36       -0.01 
        1.38     6.00       0.00        0.843          1.37       -0.01 
        1.39    12.00       0.00        0.899          1.38       -0.01 
        1.41    20.00       0.00        0.982          1.42        0.00 
        1.43    26.00       0.00        1.045          1.44        0.01 
        1.45    30.00       0.00        1.089          1.46        0.01 
        4.31     2.00       0.00        1.427          4.32        0.01 
        4.34     6.00       0.00        1.542          4.34       -0.00 
        4.38    12.00       0.00        1.721          4.39        0.01 
        4.47    20.00       0.00        1.971          4.47        0.00 
        4.52    26.00       0.00        2.163          4.52        0.01 
        4.57    30.00       0.00        2.304          4.57        0.00 
        7.26     2.00       0.00        2.041          7.25       -0.00 
        7.30     6.00       0.00        2.236          7.30        0.00 
        7.39    12.00       0.00        2.542          7.39       -0.00 
        7.48    20.00       0.00        2.947          7.48       -0.00 
        7.60    26.00       0.00        3.277          7.59       -0.01 
        7.65    30.00       0.00        3.502          7.65       -0.00 


                                           2    3 
Oxygen(ml/l)=Soc*(V+ Voffset)*(1.0 +A*T+B*T +C*T )*OxSol(T,S)*exp(E*P /K) 
V = voltage output from SBE43, T = temperature [deg C], S = salinity [PSU], K = temperature [Kelvin] 
OxSol(T,S) = oxygen saturation [ml/l], P = pressure [dbar], Residual = instrument oxygen - bath oxygen 














                           Sea-Bird Electronics, Inc.

                13431 NE 20th Street, Bellevue, WA 98005-2010 USA

    Phone: (+1) 425-643-9866 Fax (+1) 425-643-9954 Email: seabird@seabird.com


SENSOR SERIAL NUMBER: 0185                 SBE 43 OXYGEN CALIBRATION DATA 
CALIBRATION DATE: 31-Dec-13 

COEFFICIENTS                               NOMINAL DYNAMIC COEFFICIENTS 
                      A = -3.2374e-003 
Soc = 0.5352          B = 1.3084e-004      D1 = 1.92634e-4      H1 = -3.30000e-2 
Voffset = -0.5047     C = -2.1473e-006     D2 = -4.64803e-2     H2 =  5.00000e+3 
Tau20 = 1.48          E nominal = 0.036                         H3 = 1.45000e+3 


      BATH OX  BATH TEMP  BATH SAL   INSTRUMENT     INSTRUMENT   RESIDUAL
       (ml/l)   ITS-90      PSU     OUTPUT(VOLTS)  OXYGEN(ml/l)   (ml/l) 
      -------  ---------  --------  -------------  ------------  --------
        1.32     2.00       0.00        0.759          1.31       -0.00 
        1.34     6.00       0.00        0.795          1.33       -0.00 
        1.34    12.00       0.00        0.846          1.34       -0.00 
        1.36    20.00       0.00        0.916          1.36       -0.00 
        1.36    30.00       0.00        1.008          1.37        0.01 
        1.37    26.00       0.00        0.971          1.37        0.00 
        4.15     2.00       0.00        1.310          4.15       -0.01 
        4.16     6.00       0.00        1.410          4.16       -0.00 
        4.17    12.00       0.00        1.565          4.18        0.00 
        4.21    20.00       0.00        1.780          4.21        0.00 
        4.23    30.00       0.00        2.061          4.24        0.01 
        4.24    26.00       0.00        1.950          4.25        0.01 
        6.96     2.00       0.00        1.856          6.96        0.00 
        6.98     6.00       0.00        2.026          6.99        0.01 
        7.06    12.00       0.00        2.296          7.06       -0.00 
        7.08    26.00       0.00        2.919          7.09        0.01 
        7.10    30.00       0.00        3.104          7.09       -0.01 
        7.12    20.00       0.00        2.657          7.11       -0.01 


                                           2    3 
Oxygen(ml/l)=Soc*(V+ Voffset)*(1.0 +A*T+B*T +C*T )*OxSol(T,S)*exp(E*P /K) 
V = voltage output from SBE43, T = temperature [deg C], S = salinity [PSU], K = temperature [Kelvin] 
OxSol(T,S) = oxygen saturation [ml/l], P = pressure [dbar], Residual = instrument oxygen - bath oxygen 














                           Sea-Bird Electronics, Inc.

                13431 NE 20th Street, Bellevue, WA 98005-2010 USA

    Phone: (+1) 425-643-9866 Fax (+1) 425-643-9954 Email: seabird@seabird.com


SENSOR SERIAL NUMBER: 1071                 SBE 43 OXYGEN CALIBRATION DATA 
CALIBRATION DATE: 21-Jul-12 

COEFFICIENTS                               NOMINAL DYNAMIC COEFFICIENTS 
                      A = -1.6343e-003 
Soc = 0.4611          B = 3.9125e-005      D1 = 1.92634e-4      H1 = -3.30000e-2 
Voffset = -0.5086     C = -8.4413e-007     D2 = -4.64803e-2     H2 = 5.00000e+3 
Tau20 = 1.25          E nominal = 0.036                         H3 = 1.45000e+
3 


      BATH OX  BATH TEMP  BATH SAL   INSTRUMENT     INSTRUMENT   RESIDUAL
       (ml/l)   ITS-90      PSU     OUTPUT(VOLTS)  OXYGEN(ml/l)   (ml/l) 
      -------  ---------  --------  -------------  ------------  --------
        1.24     2.00       0.05        0.787          1.24       -0.00 
        1.25     6.00       0.05        0.822          1.25       -0.00 
        1.26    12.00       0.04        0.875          1.26       -0.00 
        1.27    20.00       0.04        0.950          1.26       -0.00 
        1.27    26.00       0.04        1.009          1.27        0.00 
        1.27    30.00       0.04        1.052          1.28        0.00 
        4.20     2.00       0.05        1.455          4.21        0.01 
        4.21     6.00       0.05        1.568          4.22        0.00 
        4.22    20.00       0.04        1.983          4.22        0.00 
        4.23    30.00       0.04        2.311          4.23        0.00 
        4.23    12.00       0.04        1.745          4.23        0.00 
        4.24    26.00       0.04        2.181          4.24        0.00 
        6.77    12.00       0.04        2.486          6.77       -0.00 
        6.79    20.00       0.04        2.880          6.79        0.00 
        6.80     6.00       0.05        2.217          6.80        0.00 
        6.81     2.00       0.05        2.038          6.80       -0.00 
        6.85    30.00       0.04        3.424          6.85       -0.00 
        6.86    26.00       0.04        3.211          6.85       -0.00 


                                           2    3 
Oxygen(ml/l)=Soc*(V+ Voffset)*(1.0 +A*T+B*T +C*T )*OxSol(T,S)*exp(E*P /K) 
V = voltage output from SBE43, T = temperature [deg C], S = salinity [PSU], K = temperature [Kelvin] 
OxSol(T,S) = oxygen saturation [ml/l], P = pressure [dbar], Residual = instrument oxygen - bath oxygen 











3.  P16S_2014 CHLOROFLUOROCARBON (CFC), SULFUR HEXAFLUORIDE (SF6), AND NITROUS OXIDE (N2O)* 

    PI: Mark J. Warner, University of Washington (warner@u.washington.edu) 
    Samplers and Analysts: Mark J. Warner, University of Washington 
                           Patrick Mears, University of Texas 
                           Katie Kirk, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute 

* Note that N2O measurements are a Level 3 measurement. The concentrations 
were measured on the same water samples collected for the Level 1 CFC/SF6 
measurements. The N2O analysis is still under development. Please contact 
the PI for any use of these data. 


3.1.  Measurements

Samples for the analysis of dissolved CFC-11, CFC-12, SF6, and N2O were 
collected from approximately 2100 of the Niskin water samples during the 
expedition. When taken, water samples for CFC analysis were the first samples 
drawn from the 10-liter bottles. Care was taken to coordinate the sampling of 
CFCs with other samples to minimize the time between the initial opening of each 
bottle and the completion of sample drawing. In most cases, dissolved oxygen, 
dissolved inorganic carbon, and pH samples (and He-3 when sampled) were 
collected within several minutes of the initial opening of each bottle. To 
minimize contact with air, the CFC samples were collected from the Niskin bottle 
petcock into 250-cc ground glass syringes through plastic 3-way stopcocks. The 
syringes were stored in large ice chest in the laboratory at 3.5° - 6°C until 
30-45 minutes before analysis to reduce the degassing and bubble formation in 
the sample. At that time, they were transferred to a water bath at approximately 
35°C in order to increase the stripping efficiency. 

Concentrations of CFC-11, CFC-12, SF6, and N2O in air samples, seawater and gas 
standards were measured by shipboard electron capture gas chromatography (EC-
GC). This system from the University of Washington was located in a portable 
laboratory on the helo-deck. Samples were introduced into the GC-EC via a purge 
and trap system. Approximately 200-ml water samples were purged with nitrogen 
and the compounds of interest were trapped on a Porapak Q/Carboxen 
1000/Molecular Sieve 5A trap cooled by an immersion bath to -60°C. During the 
purging of the sample (6 minutes at 200 ml min-1 flow), the gas stream was 
stripped of any water vapor via a Nafion trap in line with an ascarite/magnesium 
perchlorate desiccant tube prior to transfer to the trap. The trap was isolated 
and heated by direct resistance to 175°C. The desorbed contents of the trap were 
back-flushed and transferred onto the analytical pre-columns. The first 
precolumn was a 40-cm length of 1/8-in tubing packed with 80/100 mesh Porasil B. 
This precolumn was used to separate the CFC-11 from the other gases. The second 
pre-column was 13 cm of 1/8-in tubing packed with 80/100 mesh molecular sieve 
5A. This pre-column separated the N2O from CFC-12 and SF6. Three analytical 
columns in three gas chromatographs with electron capture detectors were used in 
the analysis. CFC-11 was separated from other compounds by a long column 
consisting of 30 cm of Porasil B and 130 cm of Porasil C maintained at 80°C. 
CFC-12 and SF6 were analyzed using a column consisting of 100 cm Porasil B and 
2.33 m of molecular sieve 5A maintained at 80°C. The analytical column for N2O 
was 30 cm of molecular sieve 5A in a 220°C oven. The carrier gas for this column 
was instrumental grade P-5 gas (95% Ar / 5% CH4) that was directed onto the 
second precolumn and into the third column for the N2O analyses. 

The analytical system was calibrated frequently using a standard gas of known 
gas composition. Gas sample loops of known volume were thoroughly flushed with 
standard gas and injected into the system. The temperature and pressure was 
recorded so that the amount of gas injected could be calculated. The procedures 
used to transfer the standard gas to the trap, precolumns, main chromatographic 
columns and EC detectors were similar to those used for analyzing water samples. 
Three sizes of gas sample loops were used. Multiple injections of these loop 
volumes could be made to allow the system to be calibrated over a relatively 
wide range of concentrations. Air samples and system blanks (injections of loops 
of CFC-free gas) were injected and analyzed in a similar manner. The typical 
analysis time for samples was 750 sec. 

For atmospheric sampling, a ~100 meter length of 3/8-in OD Dekaron tubing was 
run from the portable laboratory to the bow of the ship. A flow of air was drawn 
through this line to the main laboratory using an Air Cadet pump. The air was 
compressed in the pump, with the downstream pressure held at ~1.5 atm. using a 
back-pressure regulator. A tee allowed a flow (100 ml min-1) of the compressed 
air to be directed to the gas sample valves of the CFC/SF6/N2O analytical 
system, while the bulk flow of the air (>7 l min-1) was vented through the back-
pressure regulator. Air samples were generally analyzed when the relative wind 
direction was within 100 degrees of the bow of the ship to reduce the 
possibility of shipboard contamination. The pump was run for approximately 30 
minutes prior to analysis to insure that the air inlet lines and pump were 
thoroughly flushed. The average atmospheric concentrations determined during the 
cruise (from a set of 4 measurements analyzed when possible, n=16) were 230.8 
+/- 6.0 parts per trillion (ppt) for CFC-11, 516.9 +/- 12.5 ppt for CFC-12, 8.0 
+/- 0.9 ppt for SF6, and 329.6 +/- 15.4 parts per billion for N2O. Note that a 
larger aliquot was required for higher precision N2O analysis. 

Concentrations of the CFCs in air, seawater samples and gas standards are 
reported relative to the SIO98 calibration scale (Cunnold, et. al., 2000). 
Concentrations in air and standard gas are reported in units of mole fraction in 
dry gas, and are typically in the parts per trillion (ppt) range for CFCs and 
SF6 and parts per billion (ppb) for N2O. Dissolved CFC concentrations are given 
in units of picomoles per kilogram seawater (pmol kg-1), SF6 in femtomoles per 
kilogram seawater (fmol kg-1), and N2O in nanomoles per kilogram seawater (nmol 
kg-1). CFC concentrations in air and seawater samples were determined by fitting 
their chromatographic peak areas to multi-point calibration curves, generated by 
injecting multiple sample loops of gas from a working standard (UW WRS 32399) 
into the analytical instrument. Full-range calibration curves were run at the 
beginning and end of the cruise, and they were supplemented with occasional 
injections of multiple aliquots of the standard gas at more frequent time 
intervals. Single injections of a fixed volume of standard gas at one atmosphere 
were run much more frequently (at intervals of 2 hours) to monitor short-term 
changes in detector sensitivity. The SF6 peak was often on a small bump on the 
baseline, resulting in a large dependence of the peak area on the choice of 
endpoints for integration. Estimated accuracy is +/- 3%. Estimated limit of 
detection is 1 fmol kg-1 for CFC-11, 6 fmol kg-1 for CFC-12 and 0.05 fmol kg-1 for 
SF6. 

The efficiency of the purging process was evaluated at every other station by 
re-stripping water samples and comparing the residual concentrations to initial 
values. These re-strip values were less than 1% for CFC-11 and essentially zero 
for CFC-12 and SF6. For N2O, the re-strip values were complicated by the 
apparent production of N2O within the re-stripped sample within the sparging 
chamber for a subset of the samples. See the discussion below. Based on the re-
strips of numerous samples from the deep ocean, the mean values were 
approximately 4%. 

Based upon samples with very low CFC-12 concentrations and the ratio to CFC-11, 
there appears to be a sampling blank associated with CFC-11. A preliminary 
estimate for this blank of 0.003 pmol kg-1 has been applied to the CFC-11 
concentrations. No sampling blanks were applied to the other gases. 

On this expedition, based on the analysis of 40 duplicate samples, we estimate 
precisions (1 standard deviation) of 2.1% or 0.006 pmol kg-1 (whichever is 
greater) for dissolved CFC-11, 0.97% or 0.004 pmol kg-1 for CFC-12 measurements, 
0.03 fmol kg-1 or 3.4% for SF6, and 0.35 nmol kg-1 or 1.6% for N2O. 


3.2  Analytical Difficulties 

On this expedition, the ratio of CFC-11 to CFC-12 is too high for samples with 
low concentrations of both compounds. Two possible explanations for this finding 
are 1) a sampling blank associated with CFC-11 and 2) poorly constrained 
calibration curves as peak areas approach 0. Post-cruise processing will be 
necessary to determine which of these possibilities are more likely. The 
calibration curve run at the end of the cruise will hopefully be useful in 
sorting this out. The re-strip values for N2O in near-surface samples from 
Stations 17-33 (at least, after that we re- stripped deep samples) were greater 
than 10% and increased to as high as 40%. Since the stripper blank remained 
about the same and none of the other gases showed similar trends, we did 
experiments to show that N2O was being produced within the stripper during the 
13 minutes between analyses. Some microbe took advantage of the anoxic 
environment and the plentiful nutrients to produce nitrous oxide at a relatively 
high rate. We will review our data to determine whether this might affect our 
calculated concentrations for these water samples - if the microbes could 
actually begin to generate N2O during the first strip of the sample. When we 
tried the experiment later in the cruise, at Station 64, the re-strips were the 
expected 3-4%. 


3.3.  References

Prinn, R. G., Weiss, R.F., Fraser, P.J., Simmonds, P.G., Cunnold, D.M., Alyea, 
    F.N., O'Doherty, S., Salameh, P., Miller, B.R., Huang, J., Wang, R.H.J., 
    Hartley, D.E., Harth, C., Steele, L.P., Sturrock, G., Midgley, P.M., 
    McCulloch, A., 2000. A history of chemically and radiatively important gases 
    in air deduced from ALE/GAGE/AGAGE. Journal of Geophysical Research, 105, 
    17,751-17,792 




4.  DISSOLVED INORGANIC CARBON (DIC) 

    PI: Richard A. Feely (NOAA/PMEL)
    Technicians: Dana Greeley (NOAA/PMEL) and Charles Featherstone (NOAA/AOML)


4.1.  Sample collection: 

Samples for DIC measurements were drawn (according to procedures outlined in the 
PICES Publication, Guide to Best Practices for Ocean CO2 Measurements) from 
Niskin bottles into 310 ml borosilicate glass flasks using silicone tubing. The 
flasks were rinsed once and filled from the bottom with care not to entrain any 
bubbles, overflowing by at least one-half volume. The sample tube was pinched 
off and withdrawn, creating a 6 ml headspace and 0.12 ml of saturated HgCl2 
solution was added as a preservative. The sample bottles were then sealed with 
glass stoppers lightly covered with Apiezon-L grease. DIC samples were collected 
from variety of depths with approximately 10% of these samples taken as 
duplicates. 


4.2. Equipment: 

The analysis was done by coulometry with two analytical systems (PMEL1 and 
PMEL2) used simultaneously on the cruise. Each system consisted of a coulometer 
(5011 UIC Inc) coupled with a Dissolved Inorganic Carbon Extractor (DICE). The 
DICE system was developed by Esa Peltola and Denis Pierrot of NOAA/AOML and Dana 
Greeley of NOAA/PMEL to modernize a carbon extractor called SOMMA (Johnson et 
al. 1985, 1987, 1993, and 1999; Johnson 1992). 

The two DICE systems (PMEL-1 and PMEL-2) were set up in a seagoing container 
modified for use as a shipboard laboratory on the aft main working deck of the 
RVIB Nathaniel B. Palmer. During the 11 day transit, from Hobart to the P16S 
line along 150°W, the outside air conditioning unit for the container was 
flooded with water and quit operating. For this reason, and the fact that the 
deck was awash during much of the transit, it was decided to move the 2 DICE 
systems into the aft end of the dry lab near the pH and Alkalinity equipment, 
thus completing the carbon trifecta. This trifecta shared the 1036 sq. ft. aft 
dry lab of the Palmer with seven refrigerators and freezers and the crew from 
NASA. This lab was conveniently located just forward of the Baltic Room. 


4.3.  Calibration, Accuracy, and Precision: 

The stability of each coulometer cell solution was confirmed three different 
ways. 

1) Gas loops were run at the beginning and end of each cell; 

2) CRM's supplied by Dr. A. Dickson of SIO, were measured near the beginning; and 

3) Duplicate samples were typically run throughout the life of the cell 
   solution. 

Each coulometer was calibrated by injecting aliquots of pure CO2 (99.999%) by 
means of an 8-port valve (Wilke et al., 1993) outfitted with two calibrated 
sample loops of different sizes (~1ml and ~2ml). The instruments were each 
separately calibrated at the beginning of each cell with a minimum of two sets 
of these gas loop injections and then again at the end of each cell to ensure no 
drift during the life of the cell. Even though we experienced a large 
temperature fluctuation in the aft dry lab (14°C to 31°C) these standard loops 
were well insulated and consistent throughout the cruise. 

The accuracy of the DICE measurement is determined with the use of standards 
(Certified Reference Materials (CRMs), consisting of filtered and UV irradiated 
seawater) supplied by Dr. A. Dickson of Scripps Institution of Oceanography 
(SIO). The CRM accuracy is determined manometrically on land in San Diego and 
the DIC data reported to the data base have been corrected to this batch 135 CRM 
value. The CRM certified value for this batch is 2036.91 µmol/kg-1. 

The precision of the two DICE systems can be demonstrated via the replicate 
samples. Approximately 10% of the niskins sampled were duplicates taken as a 
check of our precision. These replicate samples were interspersed throughout the 
station analysis for quality assurance and integrity of the coulometer cell 
solutions. The average absolute difference from the mean of these replicates is 
0.44 µmol/kg-1 No systematic differences between the replicates were observed2. 



4.4.  Summary 

The overall performance of the analytical equipment was very good during the 
cruise. Once the station spacing went to 40 NM we were able to sample every 
niskin made available to us. It was only at the end of the cruise, when the lab 
temperature rose significantly and cut down on the efficiency of our equipment, 
that we started to cut back on our coverage. At the very start of the cruise, 
pinch valve #7 failed on PMEL1 but was replaced immediately and without 
complications. The display for the UIC 5011 coulometer on PMEL1 froze on a few 
occasions but fortunately not during analysis of a water sample. Near the end, 
when the lab temperature went above 28°C, one of the water bath's temperature 
sensors failed and was replaced with a spare. The major problem that was hurdled 
stemmed from the poor location of the container on the aft main deck. During the 
past 10 years this same container has been on (11) oceanographic cruises in all 
the world's oceans on (8) different UNOLS ships without major issue due to the 
seas. However during this trip, the main deck of the Palmer was awash much of 
the transit forcing the closure of the deck to scientific personnel. 
Unfortunately this sea water was enough to both kill the air conditioner and 
make its way through the hinge side of the double dogged water tight door on the 
container converted to lab van. In hindsight the helo deck (or 02 level up two 
decks) next to where the CFC container was located would've been a much more 
appropriate location for this container. 

On a much more positive note, many thanks are given to Joe Tarnow, one of the 
two ship's IT personnel, for recovering the hard drive from one of the pc 
computers that also took on some water (during the transit) in the van on the 
main deck. Joe was able to transfer the drive to another pc and PMEL1 was 
(thanks to his hard work) seamlessly back in operation. 

Including the duplicates, over 3,000 samples were analyzed for dissolved 
inorganic carbon which means that there is a DIC value for more than 85% of the 
niskins tripped. The total dissolved inorganic carbon data reported to the 
database directly from the ship are to be considered preliminary until a more 
thorough quality assurance can be completed shore side. 

Calibration data during this cruise: 
                                                            1           2
     SYSTEM  Large Loop  Small Loop  Pipette Volume  Ave CRM   Duplicate
     ------  ----------  ----------  --------------  --------  ----------
     PMEL1   1.9842 ml   1.0006 ml     27.571 ml     2035.19      0.44
     PMEL2   1.9885 ml   0.9857 ml     26.363 ml     2036.11      0.45
    

4.5.  References: 

Dickson, A.G., Sabine, C.L. and Christian, J.R. (Eds.), (2007): Guide to Best 
    Practices for Ocean CO2 Measurements. PICES Special Publication 3, 191 pp. 

Feely, R.A., R. Wanninkhof, H.B. Milburn, C.E. Cosca, M. Stapp, and P.P. Murphy 
    (1998): "A new automated underway system for making high precision pCO2 
    measurements aboard research ships." Anal. Chim. Acta, 377, 185-191. 

Johnson, K.M., A.E. King, and J. McN. Sieburth (1985): "Coulometric DIC analyses 
    for marine studies: An introduction." Mar. Chem., 16, 61-82. 

Johnson, K.M., P.J. Williams, L. Brandstrom, and J. McN. Sieburth (1987): 
    "Coulometric total carbon analysis for marine studies: Automation and 
    calibration." Mar. Chem., 21, 117-133. 

Johnson, K.M. (1992): Operator's manual: "Single operator multiparameter 
    metabolic analyzer (SOMMA) for total carbon dioxide (CT) with coulometric 
    detection." Brookhaven National Laboratory, Brookhaven, N.Y., 70 pp. 

Johnson, K.M., K.D. Wills, D.B. Butler, W.K. Johnson, and C.S. Wong (1993): 
    "Coulometric total carbon dioxide analysis for marine studies: Maximizing 
    the performance of an automated continuous gas extraction system and 
    coulometric detector." Mar. Chem., 44, 167-189. 

Lewis, E. and D. W. R. Wallace (1998) Program developed for CO2 system 
    calculations. Oak Ridge, Oak Ridge National Laboratory. 
    http://cdiac.ornl.gov/oceans/co2rprt.html 

Wilke, R.J., D.W.R. Wallace, and K.M. Johnson (1993): "Water-based gravimetric 
    method for the determination of gas loop volume." Anal. Chem. 65, 2403-2406 



5.  DISCRETE pH ANALYSES 

    PI: Dr. Andrew Dickson (SIO/UCSD)
    Ship technician: J. Adam Radich (SIO/UCSD)


5.1.  Sampling 

Samples were collected in 300 mL Pyrex glass bottles and sealed using grey butyl 
rubber stoppers held in place by aluminum crimped caps. Each bottle was rinsed 
three times and allowed to overflow by one additional bottle volume. Prior to 
sealing, each sample was given a 1% head-space and poisoned with 0.02% saturated 
mercuric chloride (HgCl2). Samples were collected only from the Niskin bottles 
sampled by both total alkalinity or dissolved inorganic carbon in order to 
generate a complete characterize the carbon system. This was ended in an overall 
coverage of greater than 75%. Additionally duplicate bottles were taken (2-4) on 
random Niskins for each station throughout the course of the cruise. All data 
should be considered preliminary. 


5.2.  Analysis 

pH was measured on the total hydrogen scale using an Agilent 8453 
spectrophotometer outlined in the methods paper by Carter et al. 2012. A Thermo 
NESLAB RTE-7 recirculating water bath was used to maintain spectrophotometric 
cell temperature at 20.0°C during the analyses. A custom 10cm flow through 
jacketed cell was filled autonomously with samples using a Kloehn V6 syringe 
pump. The sulfonephthalein indicator m-cresol purple (mCp) was used to measure 
the absorbance of light measured at two different wavelengths (434 nm, 578 nm) 
corresponding to the maximum absorbance peaks for the acidic and basic forms of 
the indicator dye. A baseline absorbance was also measured and subtracted from 
these wavelengths. The baseline absorbance was determined by averaging the 
absorbances from 725-735nm. The ratios of the absorbances were then used to 
calculate pH on the total scales using the equations outlined in Liu et al., 
2011. The salinity data used was obtained from the conductivity sensor on the 
CTD. The salinity data was later corroborated by shipboard measurements. 
Temperature of the samples was measured immediately after spectrophotometric 
measurements using a YSI 4600 thermometer. 


5.3.  Reagents 

The mCp indicator dye was made up to a concentration of 2.0mM and a total ionic 
strength of 0.7 mol/kg. A total of 3 batches were used during the cruise. The 
pHs of these batches were adjusted to approximately 7.8 using dilute solutions 
of HCl and NaOH and a pH meter calibrated using NBS buffers. The indicator was 
provided by Dr. Robert Byrne of the University of South Florida, and was 
purified using the HPLC technique described by Liu et al., 2011. 


5.4. Standardization/Results 

The precision of the data was accessed from measurements of duplicate analyses, 
certified reference material (CRM) Batch 135 (provided by Dr. Andrew Dickson, 
UCSD), and TRIS buffer Batch 20 (provided by Dr. Andrew Dickson, UCSD). CRMs 

were measured twice a day and bottles of TRIS buffer were measured once a day 
over the course of the cruise. The preliminary precision obtained from duplicate 
analyses was found to be ±0.0003. 


5.5.  Data Processing 

The addition of an indicator dye perturbs the pH of the sample and the degree to 
which pH is affected is a function of the differences between the pH of the 
seawater and the pH of the indicator. Therefore, a correction is applied to all 
samples measured for a given batch of dye. To determine this correction samples 
of varying pH and water composition were randomly run with a single injection of 
dye and then again with a double injection of dye on a single bottle. To 
determine this correction the change in the measured absorbance ratio R where R 
=(A578-Abase) / (A434-Abase) is divided by the change in the isosbestic 
absorbance (Aiso at 488nm) observed from two injections of dye to one (R''-R') / 
(Aiso''-Aiso') is plotted against the measured R value for the single injection 
of dye is then plotted and fitted with a linear regression. From this fit the 
slope and y- intercept (b and a respectively) are determined by: 

∆R/∆Aiso = b.i' + a (1) 

From this the corrected ratio (R) corresponding to the measured absorbance ratio 
if no indicator dye were present can be determined by: 

R =R'-Aiso' (bR' + a) (2) 

Preliminary data has not been corrected for the perturbation. 



5.6.  References 

Carter, B.R., Radich, J.A., Doyle, H.L., and Dickson, A.G., "An Automated 
    Spectrometric System for Discrete and Underway Seawater pH Measurements," 
    Limnology and Oceanography: Methods, 2013. 

Liu, X., Patsvas, M.C., Byrne R.H., "Purification and Characterization of meta 
    Cresol Purple for Spectrophotometric Seawater pH Measurements," 
    Environmental Science and Technology, 2011. 




6.  P16S -2014 -ALKALINITY 

PI: Andrew G. Dickson, Marine Physical Laboratory, Scripps Institution of Oceanography 
Technicians: David Cervantes and Ellen Briggs (SIO/UCSD)


6.1.  Sample Collection 

Samples for alkalinity measurements were taken at all P16S Stations (1-90). The 
Niskin bottles chosen for sampling matched those chosen for Dissolved Inorganic 
Carbon measurements. Two Niskins at each station were sampled twice for 
duplicate measurements. Using silicone tubing, the alkalinity samples were drawn 
from Niskin bottles into 250 mL Pyrex bottles, making sure to rinse the bottles 
and Teflon sleeved glassed stoppers at least twice before the final filling. A 
headspace of approximately 5 mL was removed and 0.12 mL of saturated mercuric 
chloride solution was added to each sample for preservation. After sampling was 
completed, each sample's temperature was equilibrated to approximately 20°C 
using a Thermo Scientific RTE water bath. 


6.2. Summary 

Samples were dispensed using a Sample Dispensing System (SDS) consisting of a 
volumetric pipette and various relay valves and air pumps controlled using 
LabVIEW 2012. Before filling the jacketed cell with a new sample for 
measurement, the volumetric pipette was cleared of any residual from the 
previous sample with the aforementioned air pumps. The pipette is then rinsed 
with new sample and then filled, allowing for overflow and time for the sample 
temperature to equilibrate. The temperatures inside the drawing bottle and 
pipette were measured using a DirecTemp thermistor probe inside the drawing 
bottle and DirecTemp surface probe placed on the pipette. These temperature 
measurements were used to convert the sample volume to mass for analysis. 

During instrument set up it was discovered that the Pipette A SDS board was 
dispensing more than the calibrated volume due to a weak valve. This was 
confirmed by running titrations using a calibrated manual pipette to dispense 
reference seawater of known alkalinity and measuring correct alkalinity values 
while the Pipette A SDS board was providing incorrect alkalinity values with the 
same reference seawater. As a result, the Pipette B SDS board was switched in 
and maintained its calibrated volume of 92.190 mL for the entire P16S Line. 

Samples were analyzed using an open cell titration procedure using two 250 mL 
jacketed cells. One sample was undergoing titration while the second was being 
prepared and equilibrating to 20°C for analysis. After an initial aliquot of 
approximately 2.3-2.4 mL of standardized hydrochloric acid (~0.1M HCl in ~0.6M 
NaCl solution), the sample was stirred for 5 minutes and had air bubbled into it 
at a rate of 200 scc/m to remove any liberated carbon dioxide gas. A Metrohm 876 
Dosimat Plus was used for all standardized hydrochloric acid additions. After 
equilibration, 19 aliquots of 0.04 ml were added. Between the pH range of 3.5 to 
3.0, the progress of the titration was monitored using a pH glass 
electrode/reference electrode cell, and the total alkalinity was computed from 
the titrant volume and e.m.f. measurements using a nonlinear least-squares 
approach (Dickson, et.al., 2007). An Agilent 34970A Data Acquisition/Switch Unit 
with a 34901A multiplexer was used to read the voltage measurements from the 
electrode and monitor the temperatures from the sample, acid, and room. The 
calculations for this procedure were performed automatically using LabVIEW 2012. 


6.3.  Quality Control 

Dickson laboratory Certified Reference Material (CRM) Batch 135 was used to 
determine the accuracy of analysis. The certified alkalinity value for Batch 135 
is 2226.33 ± 0.63 µmol kg-1 . This reference material was analyzed 208 times 
throughout P16S. The preliminary average B135 measured value for P16S is 2225.84 
± 0.76 

Twice per station, a single Niskin was sampled twice to conduct duplicate 
analyses. A total of 178 Niskins were sampled for Duplicate analyses and gave a 
pooled standard deviation of 0.67 µmol kg-1 . 

2749 Niskins were sampled for alkalinity analyses. The data should be considered 
preliminary since the correction for the difference between the CRMs stated and 
measured values has yet to be finalized and applied. The correction for the 
mercuric chloride addition has yet to be applied. And finally, the correction 
for any shifts in total volume dispensed per volume has yet to be applied. 

Throughout P16S, empty pre-weighed glass bottles with rubber stoppers and metal 
caps were filled with deionized water and then crimped shut. These sealed 
bottles will be weighed once they return to the lab to detect any possible 
subtle shifts in volume dispensing. 

Finally, each P16S 2014 station's alkalinity measurements were compared to 
measurements taken from the neighboring P16S 2014 stations and the P16S 2005 
stations of similar if not identical coordinates. 



6.4.  Reference 

Dickson, Andrew G., Chris Sabine and James R. Christian, editors, "Guide to Best 
    Practices for Ocean CO2 Measurements", Pices Special Publication 3, IOCCP 
    Report No. 8, October 2007, SOP 3b, "Determination of total alkalinity in 
    sea water using an open-cell titration" 




7.  DI13C / DI14C (CARBON ISOTOPES IN SEAWATER [DIC]) 

    PIs:  Ann P. McNichol, Al R. Gagnon (Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution) 
    Technician: Nicholas Huynh (Marine Science Institute, University of 
            California, Santa Barbara) 


Samples of the stable (DI13C) and radio-isotopic (DI14C) content of seawater 
dissolved inorganic carbon were collected for future analyses that will estimate 
the extent of the bomb-produced 14C pool and quantify the decrease of δ13C in the 
Southern Ocean. 

Sample collection was targeted for stations that correspond to previously carbon 
isotope- sampled stations during the 1996 and 2005 P16S CLIVAR cruises. However, 
the locations of these target stations were slightly modified to accommodate 
changes in the master sampling scheme, which were caused by weather and winch 
repair delays. 

A total of 29 stations were sampled, 17 of which captured full profiles (approx. 
32 samples), four of which captured shallow profiles (approx. 16 samples in the 
upper 3000 m of the water column), and eight of which captured a single random 
depth. At these eight stations, one set of duplicate samples was collected from 
one randomly selected Niskin bottle for future quality control purposes. At 
every station sampled, samples were only taken at depths sampled by the 
alkalinity team. 558 total samples were taken. 

Each sample was collected in a 500 ml Pyrex glass bottle using silicone tubing. 
The bottles were rinsed twice with seawater (approx. 50 ml for each rinse), 
filled, and overflown with about half the bottle volume. Once collected, a small 
volume was poured out to leave a headspace between the waterline and neck of 
each bottle. After drying the neck of a bottle with a laboratory wipe, the water 
in the bottle was fixed using ~120 ul of saturated HgCl2 (mercuric chloride) 
solution. Fixed bottles were then sealed with a M-Apiezon greased glass stoppers 
and secured with rubber bands before being stowed. 

All samples will be shipped to Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution to be 
analyzed by the AMS lab. 





8.  DISSOLVED ORGANIC CARBON AND TOTAL DISSOLVED NITROGEN 

    PI: Craig Carlson (Marine Science Institute, University of California, Santa 
        Barbara) 
    Technician: Nicholas Huynh (Marine Science Institute, University of 
                California, Santa Barbara) 


Dissolved Organic Carbon (DOC) and Total Dissolved Nitrogen (TDN) samples were 
collected for land-based measurements that will help strengthen bulk estimates 
of how carbon and nitrogen cycling in the Southern Ocean and ultimately, in the 
global ocean, have changed and may change with time. 

Samples were taken at every other station to profile a water column at every 
degree of latitude along the cruise transect. 34-36 Niskin bottles were sampled 
at each station, with one to four of those Niskins sampled twice. A total of 
1680 samples were collected. 

Each sample was collected in a 60 ml high-density polyethylene (HDPE) bottle, 
which was rinsed thrice before being filled. Prior to the cruise, bottles were 
cleaned with 10% HCl solution and rinsed thrice with deionized water. 

Water drawn from Niskins that were fired at depths lower than 500 m was not 
filtered prior to collection. Contrastingly, water drawn from depths higher than 
500 m was filtered through reusable inline cartridges holding disposable 0.2 µm 
combusted glass fiber filters (GF/F). The reusable cartridges rinsed with 
deionized water after every use and were cleaned with 10% HCl roughly every four 
to five stations. Filtration is performed for the upper 500 m of the water 
column in order to prevent the inclusion of particulate organic matter in 
dissolved organic matter measurements. 

Filled bottles were immediately frozen and stored at -20° in an onboard freezer. 

All frozen DOC samples will be shipped back to UC Santa Barbara for analysis by 
the High Temperature Combustion method. TDN will be determined from the same 
samples in the upper 300 m of the water column. 





9.  TRITIUM, HELIUM AND 18O

    PI: Peter Schlosser (Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory/Columbia U.)
    Technician: Anthony Dachille (LDEO/Columbia U.) 


Helium samples were taken from designated Niskins in 90 cc 316 type stainless 
steel gas tight vessels with valves. The samples were then extracted into 
aluminum silicate glass storage vessels within 24 hours using the at sea gas 
extraction system. The helium samples are to be shipped to the Lamont-Doherty 
Earth Observatory of Columbia University Nobel Gas Lab for mass spectrometric 
measurements. A corresponding one-liter water sample was collected from the same 
Niskin as the helium sample in a preprocessed glass bottle for degassing back at 
the shore based laboratory and subsequent tritum determination by 3He in-growth 
method. 18O samples were collected and shipped to LDEO for analysis. During 
P16S, 18 stations were sampled, collecting 371 samples for tritium, 442 samples 
for helium and 310 samples for 18O analysis. No duplicate samples were taken. 





10.  δ15N-NO3/δ18O-NO3 

     PI: Daniel Sigman (Princeton U.)
     Sampling: Brendan Carter (Princeton U.)


10.1.  Overview 

Seawater samples were collected for δ15N-NO3/δ18O-NO3 analysis aboard the RV 
Nathaniel B. Palmer on the 2014 GO-SHIP reoccupation of the P16S line in the 
South Pacific, extending from 67°S to 15°S along 150°W. The 640 samples were 
collected from 623 distinct locations in the ocean. They will be returned to the 
laboratory of Daniel Sigman in Princeton, NJ, USA for analysis by mass 
spectrometer. 

This research cruise left port from Hobart, Tasmania on March 20th 2014 and 
arrived in Pape'ete, Tahiti on May 5th 2014. The full cruise report can be found 
at http://ushydro.ucsd.edu. 


10.2  Sample Collection 

Sampling procedures recommended by Sigman were followed by the seven individuals 
involved in δ15N-NO3/δ18O-NO3 sample collection: 

    Tonia Capauno, 
    Brendan Carter, 
    Tyler Hennon, 
    Eric Sanchez Munoz, 
    Elizabeth Simons, 
    Isabella Rosso, 
    and Veronica Tamsitt. 
    
Samples were filled from a 36 bottle sampling rosette with seawater collected 
from depths ranging from the ocean surface to ~5600 m. Samples for various 
analyses were collected from the rosette in the following order: 

     1. CFCs, N2O, CCl4 
     2. Helium 
     3. Dissolved oxygen 
     4. Total dissolved inorganic carbon 
     5. pH 
     6. Total alkalinity 
     7. Carbon isotopes (δ14C, δ 13C) 
     8. Dissolved organic carbon 
     9. Nutrients 
    10. δ15N-NO3/δ18O-NO3 
    11. Salinity 
    12. Colored dissolved organic matter 
    13. δ30Si 
    14. Pigments 

Nitrate isotope sample bottles and caps were rinsed three times with sample 
seawater before filling. Bottles were filled with slightly less than 50 mL of 
seawater. Once filled, sample bottle numbers were recorded with their associated 
rosette bottle numbers on the hydrocast sampling log sheets. Samples were stored 
in a -20°C freezer within two hours of collection. Carter added inserts to the 
frozen sample bottles within one week of freezing. Inserts were rinsed with 
purified water (18.3 MΩ resistance) three times prior to insertion, and care was 
taken to avoid touching the surfaces of the inserts that could come in contact 
with frozen sample seawater. Powder free latex laboratory gloves were worn while 
adding inserts. Samples remained in the -20°C freezer between two days and four 
weeks, after which they were moved to a -80°C freezer to prepare for shipping. 
Samples remained in the -80°C freezer for at least 72 hours before shipping. 

Filtered samples 

At 15 stations, a single δ15N-NO3/ δ18O-NO3 sample was collected from the 2µm 
filters used to collect δ30Si samples. Sampling protocols were identical for 
these samples as for the unfiltered samples, aside from using filtered sample 
seawater and the collection of these samples alongside the δ30Si samples in the 
sampling order noted above. 

Details on sample filtration: At least 5 L of seawater was flushed through each 
filter before it was used for sampling the first time. Collection of filtered 
isotopic samples from the rosette began with the seawater from the surface ocean 
and ended with the seawater from the deep ocean to minimize the risk of sample 
cross contamination affecting the measured isotopic ratios. Six further steps 
were taken before collecting filtered seawater to ensure the sample seawater 
coming from the filter was uncontaminated by seawater from previous samples: 

    1. The tube connecting the filter assembly to the rosette bottle was 
       emptied, as was the dead space between the tube and the filter portion of 
       the filter assembly. 
    2. The sample tube and the dead space within the filter assembly was filled 
       with sample seawater. The sample seawater was then passed through the 
       filter gravitationally for 10 seconds. 
    3. The sample tube was disconnected from the rosette bottle and connected to 
       an oil-free pump. The pump was used to force the sample seawater in the 
       sample tube and the assembly dead space through the filter at low 
       pressure. 
    4. Step 2 was repeated. 
    5. Step 1 was repeated. 
    6. Step 2 was repeated. 

Following sample collection, steps 1 through 6 were repeated using purified 
water. A filter was sometimes used for deeper depths before it was used for 
shallower depths. When bottles were sampled out of order in this fashion, the 
filter was cleaned by following by steps 1 through 6 with purified water between 
the deeper and the shallower samples as a precautionary measure against sample 
cross contamination. 

Sampling mistakes 

Some collected samples were lost due to mishandling: 

The most common sampling problem was sample bottle overfilling. This problem was 
dealt with in two ways. When the sample was filled to the extent that sample 
seawater was lost from the sample bottle during freezing, the sample was thawed 
and dumped, and the bottle was rinsed for reuse at a later station. When the 
sample was too full to insert a sample bottle insert without extruding brine, 
the insert was not inserted and the bottle cap was labeled "NITF" for "No 
Insert; Too Full" with a permanent marker. Inserts were added to ~6 samples 
which were possibly too full for inserts, and a droplet of water was noted 
around the edge of the insert following insertion. It is not clear that these 
samples were compromised because the inserts sometimes had small amounts of 
purified water remaining on their sides from the rinsing procedure. These 
samples were not dumped, instead they were placed in labeled plastic bags for 
shipping. 

Bottles from station 31 remained unfrozen for ~10 hours following collection. 
These samples were dumped and the sample bottles reused at a later station (the 
sample bottles were first labeled "FL" for “Frozen Late” but these labels can be 
ignored since the problematic sample seawater was ultimately dumped). Samples 
that were sampled improperly and dumped for reuse are flagged 9 (meaning: “not 
collected”) in the cruise databases. Therefore no missing value indicator needs 
to be reported for these samples.

Sampling plan

The sampling plan provided by Sigman was followed wherever possible. The 
following table indicates where the sampling plan called for samples and where 
samples were ultimately collected. The comments explain any discrepancies 
between sample planning and collection.


                  Planned           Collected
Lat.  Station  Normal  Filtered  Normal  Filtered  Comments
(°S)     #
----  -------  ------  --------  ------  --------  -----------------------------
 68     --       36       0         0       0      Our southernmost station was 
                                                     at 67°S
 67      5        0       0        32       0      *, One rosette bottle failed 
                                                     to close, so sample bottle 
                                                     30 was reused on station 23.
 65      9       36       1         0       0      Bottles overfilled. Washed 
                                                     and reused later.
 64      11      36       0        34       1      *
 63      13       0       0        18       0
 62      --      24       0         0       0      We skipped this station due 
                                                     to weather
 61      19       0       0        18       0      Station numbering due to weather  
 60      17      36       1        34       1      *, Station numbering due to weather 
 59      16      12       1        12       1      Station numbering due to weather  
 58      15      24       1        24       1      Station numbering due to weather  
 57      23      12       1        12       1     
 56      25      36       1        34       1      *
 55      27      12       1        12       1   
 54      29      24       1        24       1   
 53      31      12       1         0       0      Bottles not frozen. Washed and
                                                     reused later.
 52      33      36       1        36       1
 51      35      12       1        12       1
 50      37      24       1        24       1
 48      40      36       1        34       1       *, Collected at 48° 20'
 46      43      24       1        24       1       Collected at 46° 20'
 44      46      36       1        36       1       Collected at 44° 20'
 42      49      24       0        24       0       Collected at 42° 20'
 40      52      36       0        36       0       Collected at 40° 20'
 35      60       0       0        24       1
 30      67      36       0        36       0       Collected at 30° 20'
 25      75       0       0        24       0
 20      82      24       0        24       0       Collected at 20° 20'
 18      85      36       0        37       0       Collected at 18° 20', one replicate
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Total           624      15       625      15
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
* indicates that 2 rosette bottles were reserved for pigment samples, so only 34 
  of 36 planned bottles were filled. 



10.3  Sample Measurement

These samples will be analyzed for nitrate nitrogen and oxygen isotopic analysis 
by bacterial reduction to nitrous oxide followed by automated nitrous oxide 
extraction, purification, and analysis on a stable isotope ratio mass 
spectrometer (Sigman et al., 2001, Analytical Chemistry; Casciotti et al., 2002, 
Analytical Chemistry). For samples from the upper ~500 m of the water column, 
analysis will be performed with and without prior removal of nitrite by sulfamic 
acid addition (Granger and Sigman, 2009, Rapid Communications in Mass 
Spectrometry). 


10.4  References

Casciotti, K. L., Sigman, D. M., Hastings, M. G., Böhlke, J. K., & Hilkert, A. 
    (2002). Measurement of the oxygen isotopic composition of nitrate in 
    seawater and freshwater using the denitrifier method. Analytical 
    Chemistry, 74(19), 4905-4912.

Granger, J., & Sigman, D. M. (2009). Removal of nitrite with sulfamic acid for 
    nitrate N and O isotope analysis with the denitrifier method. Rapid 
    Communications in Mass Spectrometry, 23(23), 3753-3762.

Sigman, D. M., Casciotti, K. L., Andreani, M., Barford, C., Galanter, M., & 
    Böhlke, J. K. (2001). A bacterial method for the nitrogen isotopic analysis 
    of nitrate in seawater and freshwater. Analytical chemistry, 73(17), 4145-
    4153.



11.  δ30Si 

     PI: Gregory DeSouza, (Princeton U.) gfds@princeton.edu 
     Sampling: Brendan Carter, (Princeton U.) brendan.carter@gmail.com 


11.1.  Overview 

Seawater samples were collected for δ30Si analysis aboard the RV Nathaniel B. 
Palmer on the 2014 GOSHIP reoccupation of the P16S line in the South Pacific, 
extending from 67°S to 15°S along 150°W. The 200 samples were collected from 168 
distinct locations in the ocean. They will be returned to the laboratory of Dr. 
Florian Wetzel in Zurich, Switzerland for analysis by mass spectrometer. 

This research cruise left port from Hobart, Tasmania on March 20th 2014 and 
arrived in Pape'ete, Tahiti on May 5th 2014. The full cruise report can be found 
at http://ushydro.ucsd.edu. 


10.2.  Sample collection 

Sampling procedures provided by DeSouza and Carter were followed by the seven 
individuals who collected δ30Si samples: 

    Tonia Capauno, 
    Brendan Carter, 
    Tyler Hennon, 
    Eric Sanchez Munoz, 
    Elizabeth Simons, 
    Isabella Rosso, 
    and Veronica Tamsitt. 

Samples were filled from a 36 bottle sampling rosette with seawater collected 
from depths ranging from the surface to ~5000 m. Samples for various analyses 
were collected in the following order: 

     1. CFCs, N2O, CCl4 
     2. Helium 
     3. Dissolved oxygen 
     4. Total dissolved inorganic carbon 
     5. pH 
     6. Total alkalinity 
     7. Carbon isotopes (δ 14C, δ 13C) 
     8. Dissolved organic carbon 
     9. Nutrients 
    10. δ15NO3 
    11. Salinity 
    12. Colored dissolved organic matter 
    13. δ30Si 
    14. Pigments 

At least 5 L of seawater was flushed through each 0.2 µm filter before it was 
used for sampling the first time. Collection of filtered isotopic samples from 
the rosette began with the seawater from the surface ocean and ended with the 
seawater from the deep ocean to minimize the risk of sample cross contamination 
affecting the measured isotopic ratios. Six further steps were taken before 
collecting seawater to ensure the sample seawater coming from the filter was 
uncontaminated by seawater from previous samples: 

    1. The tube connecting the filter assembly to the rosette bottle was 
       emptied, as was the dead space between the tube and the filter portion of 
       the filter assembly. 
    2. The sample tube and the dead space within the filter assembly was filled 
       with sample seawater. 
       The sample seawater was then passed through the filter gravitationally 
       for 10 seconds. 
    3. The sample tube was disconnected from the rosette bottle and connected to 
       an oil-free pump. The pump was used to force the sample seawater in the 
       sample tube and the assembly dead space through the filter at low 
       pressure. 
    4. Step 2 was repeated. 
    5. Step 1 was repeated. 
    6. Step 2 was repeated. 

Sample bottles and caps were rinsed three times with filtered sample seawater 
before filling. Bottles were filled with slightly less than 50 mL of seawater. 
Upon filling, sample bottle numbers were recorded with their associated rosette 
bottle numbers on the hydrocast sample log sheets. For a subset of shallow high 
latitude samples, a second sample bottle was filled (to provide double the 
volume for low Si concentration seawater measurement). Following sample 
collection, steps 1 through 6 were repeated using purified water (18.3 MΩ) 
system. A filter was sometimes used for deeper depths before it was used for 
shallower depths. When used in this fashion, the filter was cleaned by following 
by steps 1 through 6 with purified water between the deeper and the shallower 
samples as a precautionary measure against sample cross contamination. Samples 
were stored in a 4 °C refrigerator within one hour of collection, where they 
remained for between 1 to 5 weeks prior to being shipped to Zurich. 

The sampling plan provided by DeSouza was followed where possible. The following 
table indicates where the sampling plan called for samples and where samples 
were collected. 

                   Planned           Collected          
Lat.  Station   Normal  Second    Normal  Second   Comments
(°S)     #              bottles           bottles     
----  -------  -------  -------  -------  -------  --------------------------------
 65      9        7                 7             
 60     17       10                10              Station numbering due to weather
 59     16        7                 7              Station numbering due to weather
 58     15        7                 7              Station numbering due to weather
 57     23        7                 7              
 56     25        7                 7              
 55     27       13                13              
 54     29        6                 6              
 53     31        6       3         6        3      
 52     33        6       3         6        3      
 51     35        6       3         6        3      
 50     37       14       4        14        4      
 48     40       12       4        12        4      Collected at 48° 20'
 46     43       12       4        12        4      Collected at 46° 20'
 44     46       15       4        14        5      Collected at 44° 20'
 40     52       12       2        12        2      Collected at 40° 20'
 35     60       12       2        11        2      
 30     67       11       2        11        2      Collected at 30° 20'
Total  170       31     168        32           


11.3  Sample measurement

Samples were shipped for analysis to: 

Dr. Florian Wetzel 
Institute of Geochemistry and Petrology 
ETH Zurich, NW C81.1 
Clausiusstrase 25 
8092 Zurich, 
Switzerland 




12.  CALCIUM SAMPLING 

     PI: Todd Martz, Scripps Institution of Oceanography/UCSD
     Sampler: Ellen Briggs (SIO/UCSD)


Seawater samples were collected at 15 stations along the 150° W P16S transect at 
approximately 5° latitude spacing. 15 - 16 Niskin bottles were sampled at each 
station ranging from the surface to the greatest depth following those that were 
also sampled for Total Alkalinity. Two duplicate samples were taken at 250 m and 
2500 m. The sampling procedure entailed rinsing 100 mL plastic bottles three 
times before the final filling and tightly securing the cap for storage during 
transit to Scripps Institution of Oceanography for analysis of calcium 
concentration. The plastic bottles were specifically ordered to reduce any 
leeching of materials into the samples that would interfere with analysis. 




13.  TRANSMISSOMETER SHIPBOARD PROCEDURES 

     PI: Wilford D. Gardner, Texas A&M Department of Oceanography, wgardner@ocean.tamu.edu 


13.1. Instrument: WET Labs C-Star Transmissometer - S/N CST-1636DR 

13.2. Air Calibration: 

      • Calibrated the transmissometer on deck at beginning of the cruise. 
      • Washed and dried the windows with Kimwipes and distilled water. 
      • Recorded the final values for unblocked and blocked voltages plus air       
        temperature on the Transmissometer Calibration/Cast Log. 
      • Compared the output voltage with the Factory Calibration data. 
      • Computed updated calibration coefficients. 

13.3. Deck Procedures: 

      • Washed the transmissometer windows before every calibration. Rinsed both 
        windows with a distilled water bottle that contains 2-3 drops of liquid 
        soap. This was the last procedure before the CTD went in the water. 
      • Rinse instrument with fresh water at end of cruise. 

13.4. Summary: 

Deck calibrations were carried out 3 times during P16S - at the start of the 
cruise, about a month into the cruise on station 53, and the morning after the 
last station was completed. Results of the pre-cruise laboratory calibration, 
and deck calibrations done during this cruise, appear at the end of Appendix D 
with the other instrument/sensor laboratory calibrations. 

After preparing the transmissometer for deployment (see Deck Procedures above), 
CST1636DR was sent with the rosette for every CTD cast during P16S on RVIB 
Nathaniel B Palmer. Data were reported through a CTD a/d channel, then converted 
to raw voltages without applying any corrections. The data were averaged into 
half-second blocks with the CTD data, and later converted into 2-dbar block-
averaged data files. The raw voltage data will be reported to Wilf Gardner for 
further processing post- cruise, and later merged in with the CTD data at CCHDO. 

No problems were encountered with the transmissometer during this leg. 




14.  LOWERED ACOUSTIC DOPPLER CURRENT PROFILER (LADCP) DATA 

     PIs: Eric Firing (PI), François Ascani, and Julia Hummon (all U. Hawaii)
     Shipboard operators: Steven Howell, UH and Veronica Tamsitt, SIO 


14.1. System description 

The University of Hawaii (UH) ADCP group used a two Teledyne/RDI Workhorse 
Lowered Acoustic Doppler Current Profilers (LADCPs) to measure full-depth ocean 
currents during the 2014 CLIVAR/GOSHIP P16S cruise from Hobart, Australia, to 
Papeete, Tahiti aboard the RVIB Nathaniel B. Palmer. 

A 150 kHz instrument (WH150, serial number 16283, firmware 50.40, with beams 20° 
from vertical) was deployed on every cast. It was mounted near the base of the 
rosette by an anodized aluminum collar connected to three struts that were in 
turn bolted to the rosette frame. 

Beginning at station 63, a 300 kHz instrument (WH300, model WHS-I-UG300, serial 
no. 12734, firmware 50.40) was mounted in a collar at the top of the rosette 
with beams facing upward. It collected data on every subsequent station, except 
during station 78, when a serial communications issue kept it from sampling. 

From station 4 to station 63, an Inertial Motion Processor (IMP), was mounted to 
the floor of the rosette. This was the second cruise this new instrument has 
been used on. It was made by Andreas Thurnherr, of the Lamont- Doherty Earth 
Observatory and contains accelerometers for tilt and roll and magnetic flux gate 
compasses. The idea is to improve on similar measurements made by the LADCPs to 
better determine the orientation of the rosette while the LADCPs are sampling. 
This is particularly important near the Earth's magnetic poles, where the 
compasses on LADCPs have often proved unreliable. The IMP contains a Raspberry 
Pi computer running Arch Linux and measures accelerations and magnetic flux at 
100 Hz. It communicates via a WiFi interface. 

There were numerous other instruments mounted on the rosette. A rough schematic 
of positions of the LADCP and other devices is shown in Figure 14.1. 
Particularly worth noting are the altimeter, a possible source of acoustic 
interference, and the bottom contact switch, which had a weight dangling 10 m 
below. That was within the blanking interval of the WH150 so probably had little 
effect, though it certainly was visible to the altimeter. 

Power for the LADCPs and IMP was provided by a Deep Sea Power & Light sealed 
oil-filled marine battery (model SB-48V/18A, serial number 01527). It sat in a 
custom-made stainless-steel basket in the rosette frame. Figure 14.1 shows the 
arrangement of instruments in the rosette. 

Between casts, a single power/communications cable connected each LADCP and 
battery to a computer and a DC power supply to initialize the LADCP, collect 
data after casts, and recharge the battery. Communication with the instrument 
was managed by a custom serial communication package. 

Operating parameters 

The WH150 used nominal 16 m pulses and 8 m receive intervals (assuming a 
standard 1500 m s-1 speed of sound). The blanking interval (distance to first 
usable data) was 16 m. 

A staggered pinging pattern was used, with alternating 1.2 s and 1.6 s periods 
between pings. This was to avoid a problem referred to as Previous Ping 
Interference (PPI), which happens when a strong echo off the bottom from a 
previous ping overwhelms the weak scattering signal from the water column. PPI 
occurs at a distance above the ocean floor of ∆z = ½c∆t cos θ where ∆t is the 
period between pings, c is the speed of sound, and θ is the beam angle from 
vertical. With constant ping rates, the artifact hits a single depth, 
essentially invalidating all data at that depth. By alternating delays, we lose 
half the data at two depths, but have some data through the entire column. 


Figure 14.1: Schematic plan view of instrument and bottle locations on the 
             rosette before (left) and after the upward-looking WH300 was 
             mounted. Orange elements are parts of the rosette frame. Bottle 
             locations are indicated by dashed circles and numbers. Instruments 
             are identified by letters: L, LADCP (WH150); U, Up-looking LADCP 
             (WH300); B, Battery for LADCP/IMP power; I, IMP; S, bottom contact 
             Switch; C, CTD; A, Altimeter (120 kHz Benthos echosounder); T, 
             transmissometer; F, Fluorometer for chlorophyll-A; and , elements 
             of the -pod fast temperature system. White numerals show ADCP beam 
             positions. 


The WH150 control file 

CR1  # factory defaults
PS0  # Print system serial number and other info.
WM15 # sets LADCP mode; WB -> 1, WP -> 001, TP -> 000100, TE -> 00000100
TC2  # 2 ensembles per burst
TB 00:00:02.80 ### also try old BB settings, 2.6 and 1.0
TE 00:00:01.20
TP 00:00.00
WN40   # 40 cells, so blank + 320 m with 8-m cells
WS0800 # 8-m cells
WT1600 # 16-m pulse
WF1600 # Blank, 16-m
WV330  # 330 is max effective ambiguity velocity for WB1
EZ0011101 # Sound speed from EC (default, 1500)
EX00100   # No transformation (middle 1 means tilts would be used otherwise)
CF11101   # automatic binary, no serial
LZ30,230  # for LADCP mode BT; slightly increased 220->230 from Dan Torres
CL0       # don’t sleep between pings (CL0 required for software break)



The WH300 used 8 m pings, blanking intervals, and receive ranges. For stations 
63 to 67, the instrument was set to listen through 20 depth bins of 8 m each, 
for a total range of 168 m. That proved excessive, as signal strength was 
usually too weak beyond 5 bins. Starting as station 68, the number of depth bins 
were reduced to 10, and the period between pings shortened to 0.53 s. 


The WH300 control file (stations 68 and higher) 

CR1  # Factory defaults
PS0  # Print system serial number and configuration
WM15 # Sets LADCP mode WP->1; WB->1; TE->00:00:01; TP->00:01
TC1  # 1 ensemble per burst
TB 00:00:00.53 # Time between bursts
TE 00:00:00.00 # Minimum time between ensembles
TP 00:00.00 # Minimum time between pings
WP 1      # 1 ping per ensemble
WN10      # 10 cells. That’s beyond the useful range for most of the cast.
WS0800    # 8 m cells (No WT command means transmit length also 8 m)
WF0800    # 8 m blank
WV330     # Ambiguity velocity
EZ0011101 # Manual sound speed, depth, salinity; others from ADCP sensors
EX00100   # No transformation (middle 1 means tilts would be used otherwise)
CF11101


Data processing 

Data were processed using version IX.8 of Andreas Thurnherr's implementation of 
Martin Visbeck's LADCP inversion method, developed at the Lamont-Doherty Earth 
Observatory of Columbia University. The LDEO code is written in Matlab, and 
performs a long chain of calculations, including transforming the raw LADCP data 
to Earth coordinates; editing out suspect data; meshing with CTD data from the 
cast and simultaneous shipboard ADCP and GPS data; then running both an inverse 
method and a shear-based algorithm to obtain ocean currents throughout the 
profile. The shear-based calculation is used as a check on the inverse method-if 
they agree, confidence in the solution is enhanced. The LDEO code is available 
at ftp://ftp.ldeo.columbia.edu/pub/LADCP. 

Only preliminary data processing was performed during the cruise; full 
processing takes more time than was available. The automatic data editing is not 
completely adequate, as ocean bottom reflections are not always edited out and 
the algorithms for detecting and discarding PPI require more work. When the data 
are fully processed, they will be made available on the UH ADCP website, 
http://currents.soest.hawaii.edu as part of the CLIVAR ADCP archive. 

The IMP is still an experimental device; processing routines are still being 
worked on and no significant analysis was attempted beyond ensuring that the 
data were intake and made some sense. 


14.2. Data gathered 

WH150 data were successfully obtained in every cast at each station. WH300 data 
were gathered during stations 63 to 77 and 79 through 90. IMP data Preliminary 
vertical profile plots of each station were made available on the ship's website 
within 12 hours of each cast. 



Problems encountered 

We had no major hardware or software problems during the cruise. The biggest 
issue is one that always plagues deep LADCP profiles in oligotrophic regions: 
the acoustic signal relies on backscatter from mm-to cm-sized particles, and 
there are too few to get much range from the instruments. The WH150 had an 
effective range of 320 m near the surface, but was reduced to about 80 m at 
depth. The WH300 was added to increase the data available to the inversion, but 
only managed 8 m to 16 m at depth. That was a significant addition to the data, 
particularly since it pinged almost 3X as often as the WH150, so the quality of 
the profiles clearly improved. 

Whether they improved enough to be oceanographically useful is still open to 
question. Preliminary analysis by Tonia Capuano found suspiciously high 
diffusivities in the deep ocean north of Station 60 or so, implying that the 
currents are exaggerated, even after the addition of the WH300. Work is ongoing 
to improve the inversion, but we may just be facing a limitation of available 
instrumentation. The end of the cruise appeared mildly better, with more signal 
at depth. 

This was the first deployment of the WH150, and it started out with all 4 beams 
equally strong. As the cruise progressed, beam 3 weakened relative to the 
others, until its useful range was only 65% of the other beams. Curiously, it 
appeared to recover somewhat, rising back to about 85% by the end of the cruise. 
It may be that it suffered more than the other beams from the very small 
signals. 

There was considerable acoustic noise sensed by both instruments, though the 
source was not obvious. The Benthos 120 kHz altimeter is an obvious candidate, 
since it was on the rosette. The ship's multibeam and depth sounders could be 
responsible. The shipboard ADCPs are also possible sources of noise, but those 
frequencies are absorbed by seawater, so should not have much effect when the 
package is a few kilometers down. There was an odd noise signature that was only 
visible part of the time in the WH300 data, implying either an irregular source, 
or a highly directional one. 

In any case, acoustic noise affected a small fraction of the data and is usually 
easy to edit out, so it should have little effect on the overall data quality. 



Sample data plots 

We made both vertical profiles of individual plots and contour plots along the 
cruise track available on the ship's network. A contour plot of data from the 
entire cruise (autoref fig:contour) may be the best capsule summary of the 
preliminary data. 


Figure 14.2: Contour plot of P16 stations along 150°W. Tick marks along the 
             bottom of each plot are station locations. 


The strongest current was the Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC), at 54°S. 
Rather surprising was the second strongest current, at 45°S moving west at 0.3 
ms-1 at a depth of 1500 m. A profile of the currents at 45°S is shown in Figure 
14.3, together with CTD traces from that station and the previous one. An eddy 
shed by the interaction of the ACC and Antarctic-Pacific Ridge is the obvious 
source of such a current, but eddies usually bring in water from different 
regions, whereas the water in station 45 seemed identical to 44, but the 
features around 1400 m were thicker. That seems like an internal wave. Andreas 
Thurnherr of LDEO (who was also responsible for the IMP), found vertical 
currents above and below the high-velocity core that changed from upward as the 
rosette was going down to downward as the rosette was pulled back up. 

Currents through the rest of the basin are much weaker, though it is striking 
that current features south of about 40°show a much greater vertical extent than 
they do father north. 


Figure 14.3: LADCP profile(left) of station 45 at 45°S and CTD profiles at 
             stations 44 and 45. Station 45 traces can be identified by the 
             inflections in the curves at 1500 m. 





15.  CHIPODS. 

     PIs: Jonathan Nash (OSU, nash@coas.oregonstate.edu), 
          Jim Moum (OSU, moum@coas.oregonstate.edu) 
          Jennifer MacKinnon (Scripps Shipboard Operation, jmackinn@ucsd.edu). 
          Tyler Hennon: (U. of Washington, thennon@uw.edu). 


Turbulent mixing is traditionally obtained by measuring microscale shear 
variance, which must be gathered from a platform that profiles smoothly through 
the water column with minimal vibration. As a result, there is a dearth of 
direct deep-ocean mixing estimates, totaling only O(1,000) globally. This is 
because tethered free falling instruments that measure mixing cannot reach 
abyssal depths, and autonomous profilers require dedicated efforts for 
deployment and recovery on every cast. It is advantageous to develop methods 
though which turbulence can be measured from the standard shipboard CTD, since 
there are many efforts underway to obtain a broad distribution of CTD data. In 
the current effort, we seek to measure microscale temperature variance (using 
devices we call "chipods") from which mixing is inferred. The measurement of 
"chi," the dissipation rate of temperature variance is less susceptible to 
contamination from platform vibration, so is possible to obtain from traditional 
CTD. In the current effort, chipods are attached to the CTD, and therefore 
require no extra time on repeat hydrography cruises. P16S is the second of the 
repeat hydrography cruises to include CTD-chipods, and represent one part of a 
larger effort to increase the number of direct observations of mixing by an 
order of magnitude. Hennon was tasked with data collection and maintenance of 
the chipods for the duration of the P16S cruise. 

Chipods are equipped with very sensitive thermistors and accelerometers that 
sample at 100 Hz. The thermistors are extremely fragile, so are prone to failure 
from extreme pressure cycling, temperature shocks, or physical impact. The 
voltage from the thermistors is converted into temperature by calibration with 
the raw CTD temperature data (many thanks to Courtney Schatzman for providing 
these). The CTD pressure and chipod accelerometers are used to remove any data 
in contaminated water caused by loops in pressure. 

The synthesis of the chipod and CTD data culminate in the computation of χ, the 
dissipation rate of temperature variance. Through χ, the turbulent dissipation 
and diffusivities are estimated. 

For redundancy, we attached four chipod thermistors to the CTD. The locations of 
the thermistors were chosen so that they would sample water unperturbed by the 
CTD rosette, although there is the possibility of contamination from the wire 
for the upward looking thermistors, and by a "bottom-contact" weight that hangs 
10 m beneath the CTD and used as a mechanical altimeter. The initial setup had 
two RBR pressure cases each connected to and individual thermistor (one upward 
looker and one downward looker) and one larger pressure case connected to two 
thermistors (both upward looking). 

We are only in the beginning stages of making these type of measurements during 
routine CTD profiling, so we are still learning many lessons. Overall, the 
chipods returned good data. Although some individual instruments had temporary 
electrical or mechanical failure, the redundancy of using four thermistors on 3 
separate loggers allowed us to obtain at least one clean set of data for nearly 
every one of the 90 stations on P16S. 

The downward looking RBR collected an excellent dataset with few problems. The 
upward looking RBR had occasional short-lived problems, but for most stations 
returned good data. Unfortunately, the large pressure case with two upward 
looking thermistors had a series of logging problems, which we are still sorting 
out. Repeated attempts at replacing thermistors, thermistor housings, and cables 
did not seem to significantly improve the quality of the data. On April 28th 
(perhaps overdue), Hennon replaced it with another RBR attached to a single 
upward looking thermistor, reducing the total thermistors on the CTD to three. 

Based off of preliminary processing at sea, the chipod data look reasonable with 
the exception of a possible high bias in the lower ~1000 m of the ocean at many 
stations, possibly resulting from regions with extremely low temperature 
gradients where our automated processing scripted may need to be revised. 
Diffusivity values here range from about 102 to 100 m2s-1. While there is likely 
some degree of bottom intensification, these extreme estimates are probably 
biased by very weak vertical temperature gradients. Further work will be needed 
to tease out the actual mixing rates at the bottom. 




16.  A NOTE ON WIRE TENSION DURING CLIVAR/GOSHIP P16S 2014 

     Steven Howell, University of Hawaii 



As part of an effort to extend the life of cables on its oceanographic vessels, 
NSF has determined that the standard 0.322" CTD cable used in hydrographic 
surveys should not be exposed to tensions in excess of 5000 lbs1. This was a 
concern on P16S, particularly since the 36-bottle rosette used is one of the 
largest and heaviest in routine use. CLIVAR/CARBON P02E 2013, on R/V Melville 
was one of the first cruises under the new tension limits, so close attention 
was paid to winch tension. We established that casts as deep as 6000 m using the 
same rosette as P16S 2014 can be done without exceeding the 5000 lb limit. 
However, those casts were under relatively calm conditions, and the chief 
scientist, Jim Swift, wrote in the cruise report that "the main cause of cable 
tension spikes is ship motion (ship roll and heave)" and noted that high sea 
states like those found in the Southern Ocean would likely be a problem. 

Since I had participated in the wire tension analyses during P02 2013, I was 
curious to see how it changed in higher seas on a different ship. P16S 2014 used 
the same rosette, but had a bit of additional instrumentation, including the χ-
pod system from Oregon State and an Inertial Motion Processor (IMP) from Lamont 
used as an adjunct sensor for the LADCP. These add a little mass, probably some 
buoyancy, and a bit of drag to the package. 

RVIB Nathaniel B. Palmer underway data are routinely submitted to the NSF 
Rolling Deck to Repository gateway, so the data used here, from the LCI-90 winch 
monitors and the Seapath 200, should become available at their website, 

http://www.rvdata.us . 



Station 1 

During the first part of the cruise, the rosette was deployed from the Baltic 
Room. It had an LCI-90 tension measurement system like that on the Melville, 
reporting at 20 Hz. The first station, on March 26 at 60°S, 174°E, was a good 
test, as the CTD reached 4484 m depth, the deepest cast until station 31. 

Simply plotting tension as a function of wire out and doing a linear regression 
is instructive (Figure 16.1). The slope of the line is the weight in water per 
unit length of cable. According to the manufacturer, the weight in seawater is 
212 kg km-1 or 0.467 lb/m. I do not know the manufacturing tolerance or how 
precise the LCI-90 calibrations are supposed to be, but the 4% difference is 
reassuring that the winch tension, or at least the slope, is accurate to within 
a few percent. 

The intercept of 1187 lbs represents the weight of the package in water. 

The tension while the rosette was dangling in the air during the launch was 1910 
lbs. At recovery, it was 2730 lbs, an 820 lb difference. The difference must be 
due primarily to seawater in the sample bottles. Two bottles failed to trip, so 
there were 34 with ~10.5 L of seawater each. At a density of about 1.028 kg L-1, 
there should be 809 lbs of water. This is within 2% of the winch measurement. 

For comparison, for P02 2013 station 56, a 5960 m cast on April 23, a similar 
regression yielded t = 1185(1) lbs + w x 0.5082(3) lbs/m. The weight of the 
rosette in water was almost identical to that in P16S station 1, while the slope 
was about 9% higher than expected (if the wire on the Melville was made to the 
same specifications). Tension in the air during launch was 2036 lbs and at 
recovery was 2952 lbs. The difference of 916 lbs is about 7% high. 

Winch speed and acceleration also have some effect on tension and are the only 
things that can actually be controlled during the cast. From Figure 16.2, it 
appears that the drag of the package is 5.3 lbs/(m/min). There is no particular 
reason to expect a linear relationship, but this plot gives little indication 
that drag goes with the square or cube of the speed, at least within the ±1 m s-1 
winch speeds we used. This package drag agrees reasonable well with the crude 
estimate from P02W 2013 of 4 to 5 lbs/(m/min).







______________________________________________________

1I apologize for the mixed units. The winch tension is calibrated in 
pounds(force), while wire out is in meters. Since those are the numbers we see 
during the cruise, I'll continue to use them. 

 




Figure 16.1: Tension vs. wire out during station 1.

Figure 16.2: Left: Effects of winch speed on tension during station 1 after 
             correcting for wire out. Right: (Lack of) effect of winch 
             acceleration on tension after corrections for wire out and winch 
             speed. 


There is also little indication that the amount of wire out has much effect on 
drag, which implies that the drag of the wire is small compared to the package. 
A crude calculation bears that out. According to the Nbpedia, a 2011 dump of 
Wikipedia, the drag equation is 

                                          2
                                  F  = ½ρu C A                               (1)
                                   D        D


where FD is the drag force, ρ is the density of the fluid, u is the velocity 
through the fluid, CD is the coefficient of drag, and A is the area exposed to 
the fluid. The choice of CD isn't quite obvious, as there's no entry for a rod. 
Most appropriate seems to be a flat plate parallel to the fluid motion, with A = 
πdw = π0:322"w = 0.026 m2 m-1 being surface area. CD for such a plate is 0.001 in 
laminar flow to 0.005 in turbulent flow. I don't know whether the flow is 
turbulent or how to deal with the roughness of the cable. ρ = 1030 kg m-3. 
Assuming winch speed u = 60 m min-1 = 1 m s-1 and CD =0:001, Equation 1 yields 
0.013 n m-1, or 3 lb km-1. If I haven't made a major mistake, this is only 75 lbs 
even if CD is a factor of 5 too low and there are 5 km of wire out. 

As the right hand plot in Figure 16.2 shows, winch acceleration plays a very 
small role in wire tension, even after subtracting the influences of wire out 
and winch speed. Typical winch acceleration upward was 0.2 m s-2, though it was 
occasionally double that. Given the mass of the rosette and F = ma, F = 860 kg x 
0.2 m s-2 = 172 n = 39 lb. Each kilometer of cable adds F = 257 kg x 0.2 m s-2 = 
51 n = 12 lb. The rosette alone is pretty close to the 38 lb from the fit in 
Figure 2, despite the terrible correlation. I'm surprised the order of magnitude 
is right. 


Figure 16.3: Left: Time series of tension and sheave velocity calculated from 
             heave and roll. Right: Correlation between sheave velocity and 
             tension during station 1. The effects of wire out and winch speed 
             from Figure 1 and Figure 2 have been removed in both plots. 



On the Palmer, a Kongsberg Seatex Seapath 200 monitors heave, roll, pitch, and 
heading. Its output is at 1 Hz. I used the Seapath data to crudely calculate the 
position and velocity of the sheave. I ignored pitch, since the Baltic Room is 
pretty near amidships. The boom extends about 40 feet/12.2 m from the centerline 
of the ship, so the sheave position z is 

                         z = z0 + h + 12:2 sin(πr / 180)                     (2) 

where h is heave and r is roll in degrees. These are defined a bit 
counterintuitively; heave is positive downward and a roll to starboard is 
positive, so z goes up as the sheave descends. Taking the differential gives an 
approximation for weave velocity. A short time series (left side of Figure 16.3) 
shows that sheave motion is closely related to tension, but actually performing 
a linear correlation reveals that the correlation coefficient is only 0.67 
(right panel of Figure 16.3). The loops around the best-fit line indicate that 
tension is somewhat out of phase with sheave velocity, so some other factor is 
important. The obvious candidate is a spring effect, either from the 
stretchiness of the cable (0.4% at 2500 lbs is the manufacturer's specification) 
or from curves in the wire imposed by currents and package motion. I have not 
extended my analysis to include either factor; the former would be 
straightforward, while the latter might be a challenge. 

As it turned out, roll had very little influence on sheave motion, despite the 
12 m lever arm. That is because during the cast, the ship faced into the wind 
and seas, and therefore roll was minimized. Heave, on the other hand, cannot be 
avoided. 

The slope of the tension vs. sheave speed plot is 470 lbs/(m/s) considerably 
higher than that from the winch speed, which works out to 320 lbs/(m/s). This 
could reflect either the spring effects or perhaps the drag of the rosette 
through the water has a quadratic relationship with speed at the higher speeds 
imposed by the sheave. 


Figure 16.4: Wire tension calculated from wire out, winch speed, and sheave 
             velocity vs. measured tension during station 1. 


This analysis is not altogether satisfactory. Although these correlations, when 
combined, explain about 94% of the variations in tension (Figure 16.4), the peak 
tensions are poorly represented. Part of that is due to the relatively slow data 
from the Seapath, but the springiness of the system is probably more important. 
However, it did establish that under the sea states where we could actually 
conduct CTD operations, we were unlikely to exceed the 5000 lb limit, given the 
cast depths anticipated. Given other obligations on the cruise, I did not pursue 
a more complete analysis. 

Station 6 

As a test of repeatability, I did an analysis like that in Figure 1, for station 
6, a 4433 m cast on April 1 at 66.5°S, 150°W. The results, shown in Figure 5, 
are almost identical to station 1. The least-squares fit for tension vs. wire out 
is subtly different, as I only used data from when the winch was stopped. That 
gave a much higher correlation, but not significantly different results. 

Station 43 

During station 30, a cast to 4389 m on April 12, the marine tech monitoring the 
cast noticed that there were some broken strands in the outer armor of the cable 
at around 4200 m. At that point, rather than risk losing the rosette, we limited 
cast depth to about 4100 m until we could either replace the cable or transfer 
operations to another winch. Beginning on Station 39, we began using the upper 
waterfall winch for CTD operations. That turned out to be a difficult cast, as 
there were electrical problems that put hundreds of spikes into the CTD data and 
the tension measurements broke down altogether. It turned out that the bracket 
holding the metering sheave that measures tension and cable motion had detached 
from the fairlead assembly. It was reattached and the cast continued, but 
reported tensions were much higher than expected, frequently exceeding the 5000 
lb limit. High reported tensions continued until the techs had a chance to 
recalibrate the LCI-90 on April 16th between stations 42 and 43. 


Figure 16.5: Wire tension during station 6. 


The recalibration brought reported tensions down, but were still higher than 
those from the Baltic Room winch. I repeated the station 6 analysis for station 
43 (Figure 16.6) and found that the slope of the tension vs. wire out had jumped 
to 0.547 lbs/m, 17% higher than the wire specifications, and the 1086 lb 
difference between launch and recovery weights was 27% higher than it should 
have been. I have more confidence in the conclusion based on wire out, even 
though the water mass method has a firmer theoretical basis. (It is unlikely, 
but conceivable that the cable on the upper waterfall winch is much heavier than 
that on the Baltic Room winch and the Melville.) The wire out regression is 
based on a large number of points over a wide range of tensions, while the data 
on weights before and after launch are short periods with noisy data over a much 
smaller tension span. Either way, the tensions reported by the waterfall winch 
are too high. 

It is probably a coincidence that the zero intercept, representing the rosette 
weight in water, was very similar at station 43 to the values at stations 1 and 
6 and the Melville. 

A striking feature of the tension time series in Figure 6 is the pattern of 
tension variation. Variability rises sharply when the rosette starts to be 
pulled back up. That cannot be explained by sheave motions. Could it be due to a 
straighter cable having less give as the tension rises? Maximum tension 
variability appears to be between 500 M and 3000 m. The reasons for that are not 
clear, but may have to do with the springiness of the winch/sheave/wire/rosette 
system. This pattern is present, though often less obvious, in all of the casts. 

Station 56 

The deepest cast of the cruise was station 56, to 5628 m, at 37°40´S on April 
22. It was almost identical to station 46, except the weight of the package 
leaving the water was 100 lbs higher. It looks as though either the winch/A-
frame operator did a smoother job during 46 or the marine techs recovering the 
rosette were pulling down harder during 56. 


Figure 16.6: Wire tension during station 43. This cast was the first after 
             recalibration of the upper waterfall winch tension. 


If the tension measurements are accurate at 1200 lbs and the 17% difference 
between the slope and the manufacturer's specification of the weight in water is 
entirely due to measurement error, then the peak reported tension of 5200 lbs is 
closer to 4620 lbs. The waterfall winch would have to have been beyond about 
5650 lbs for the 5000 lb tension limit to have been exceeded. After the April 
16th winch recalibration, the maximum tension recorded was 5394 lbs on April 
18th at 07:11:39 UTC during station 46. 

Before the recalibration the maximum tension recorded was 5555 lbs at 07:46:31 
UTC on April 16th, during station 41. At that time, reported tensions were even 
more excessive. I should note here that while NSF's tension limit was never 
exceeded on the waterfall winch cable, some damage may have been done by the 16 
inch WHOI mooring block sheave, which had a wider groove than recommended for 
0.322 inch cable. Sea conditions were too rough to allow the techs to mount the 
proper sheave on the A-frame. 

Station 10 

The highest recorded tension during the cruise was at 13:14:45 on April 2nd, 
during recovery of the rosette from station 10. The tension spiked to 6965 lbs 
with 7 m of wire out. No one seemed to notice the spike as it was happening. 

The spike occurred when the package was about 10 m below the surface, after 
bottle 35 was tripped at 20 m, and before bottle 36 was tripped on the fly at 5 
m (conditions were too rough for stopping at the surface). 

The tension peak lasted about 2.1 s, with a 3/4 s rise to a sharp peak, roughly 
a second at about 6400 lbs, then a rapid drop followed by some ringing. As the 
tension peaked, the winch wire out stopped. Curiously, the winch speed took a 
couple of seconds before stopping. The winch remained stopped for 7 s before 
resuming the upcast. 

This is not a case of a swell lifting the package, then dropping it. The package 
was still 10 m down. In addition, the lift would have reduced tension before the 
spike, rather than after. 

It doesn't look like an electrical glitch. The peak lasted too long, and the 
ringing after the peak looks mechanical to me. 

This isn't a sudden swell increasing tension. No unusual rolling or heaving was 
going on, and those motions are smoother and take longer. 

The conclusion we reached was that the package had hit the bottom of the ship. 
It's not clear what else could have caused the spike. At first we had only 
indirect evidence; the rosette frame was a bit bent, and there was some paint 
missing, but no one was sure those were new. The rosette is almost 2 m tall; the 
bottom of the ship is 7 m, so the depth was about right. Later on, we learned 
that one of the thermistors in the -pod fast-temperature package had been 
crushed. It stopped reporting at exactly that time. 

Given the 10 000 lb nominal breaking strength of the cable, we were probably 
lucky not to lose the rosette. 


Figure 16.7: The only direct evidence of contact between the hull and the 
             rosette. This was crushed at the end of station 10. 







17.  SURFACE DRIFTERS (GLOBAL SURFACE VELOCITY PROGRAM)

     PI: Rick Lumpkin (NOAA/AOML)
     PI: Shaun Dolk (NOAA/AOML affiliate)
     Shipboard operations: Elizabeth Simons (FSU), Isa Rosso (ANU)



Thirty Southern Ocean GDP drifters were deployed without incident. Two primary 
deployers, Elizabeth Simons (EGS) and Isa Rosso (IR) split deployments between 
the two CTD watchstander shifts (day shift and night shift). Secondary 
assistance was provided by ASC Marine Technicians, Meghan King, Julia Carleton, 
and Mackenzie Habermann as well as the other CTD watchstanders. When a 
deployment called for pair or triplet releases, thirty (30) second deployment 
spacing was enacted to limit the possibility of drifters' drogues entangling. As 
of 25/4/2014 all 30 drifters are reporting data. 

          Deployment          P16S                                De-
Drifter      Date      Time   STA    Latitude      Longitude     ploy-  Notes on Deployment:
   ID    (dd/mm/yyyy)          #                                  er
-------  ------------  -----  ----  ------------  -------------  -----  ------------------------------------------
 114536   05/04/2014   06:57   15   60 55.2372 S  149 54.3642 W   EGS    
 114533   05/04/2014   06:57   15   60 55.1904 S  149 54.4206 W   EGS    
 114665   06/04/2014   20:54   16   58 59.6736 S  149 59.9100 W   IR    
 114645   07/04/2014   07:40   17   59 59.4360 S  150 1.4514 W    EGS    
 114661   09/04/2014   10:54   23   56 59.9952 S  150 0.1254 W    IR    
 114680   09/04/2014   10:54   23   56 59.9952 S  150 0.1272 W    IR    
 116269   09/04/2014   10:53   23   57 0.0108 S   150 0.0642 W    IR    
 116263   10/04/2014   04:33   25   55 59.9526 S  150 0.0954 W    EGS    
 114644   10/04/2014   04:34   25   55 59.9346 S  150 0.1782 W    EGS    
 114540   10/04/2014   04:34   25   55 59.9340 S  150 0.1788 W    EGS    
 114678   11/04/2014   09:36   27   55 0.3732 S   150 1.1604 W    EGS   Cap off of thermistor when deployed
 114673   11/04/2014   09:36   27   55 0.3732 S   150 1.1616 W    EGS   
 114654   11/04/2014   09:37   27   55 0.3900 S   150 1.2480 W    EGS   
 116454   11/04/2014   23:25   29   54 0.3918 S   149 54.5772 W   EGS   
 114532   11/04/2014   23:25   29   54 0.3918 S   149 54.5778 W   EGS   Cap off of thermistor when deployed
 116456   11/04/2014   23:26   29   54 0.3918 S   149 54.6282 W   EGS   Cap off of thermistor when deployed
 114664   12/04/2014   14:12   31   53 0.0000 S   150 0.0426 W    IR    
 116264   12/04/2014   14:13   31   52 59.9994 S  150 0.0432 W    IR    
 114539   12/04/2014   14:13   31   52 59.9988 S  150 0.0438 W    IR    
 114676   13/04/2014   23:41   35   51 0.0534 S   149 59.9130 W   EGS   
 114677   13/04/2014   23:41   35   51 0.0528 S   149 59.9118 W   EGS   Cap off of thermistor when deployed
 114683   13/04/2014   23:42   35   51 0.0552 S   149 59.8884 W   EGS   Cap off of thermistor & stem when deployed
 114588   15/04/2014   15:31   39   48 59.9832 S  150 0.0138 W    IR    
 116380   15/04/2014   15:32   39   48 59.9430 S  150 0.0282 W    IR    
 114536   16/04/2014   18:50   42   46 59.9658 S  150 0.0762 W    IR    
 116373   16/04/2014   18:50   42   46 59.9646 S  150 0.0768 W    IR    
 114668   18/04/2014   01:06   45   44 58.4202 S  149 59.5488 W   EGS   Cap off of thermistor & stem when deployed 
 114541   18/04/2014   01:07   45   44 58.3320 S  149 59.5140 W   EGS   Cap off of thermistor when deployed
 114684   19/04/2014   04:21   48   42 57.0444 S  150 0.0462 W    EGS   Cap off of thermistor when deployed
 116377   20/04/2014   06:40   51   40 58.1214 S  150 0.0192 W    EGS   




18.  ARGO AND ARGO-EQUIVALENT BIOGEOCHEMICAL FLOATS. 

     PIs: Ken Johnson (MBARI) and Stephen Riser (U. Washington).
     Shipboard operations: Tyler Hennon (UW) and Lynne Talley (SIO)
     Float funding sources: NSF OPP (Rapid grant) and NOPP 


18.1. Deployments from RVIB NB Palmer (extracted from the completeP16S cruise 
      report)

Twelve Argo-equivalent floats equipped with various combinations of state-of-
the-art biogeochemical instrumentation and sea ice-avoidance software were 
deployed during the RVIB NB Palmer cruise (chief scientist Lynne Talley), 20 
March -5 May, 2014 (Table 18.1 and Figure 18.1). 4 of the floats were deployed 
along the great-circle transit from Hobart, Tasmania, to the initial station of 
the P16Ssection (67°S, 150°W), and the remaining 8 were deployed along 150°W 
from 67°S to 39°40'S. Six of the 7 floats along 150°W that included pH sensors 
were funded through an NSF Rapid grant; the high resolution T/S data are 
reported to Argo. The other 6 are Argo floats that have been outfitted with 
additional sensors through a NOPP grant. Tyler Hennon, a U. Washington graduate 
student (advisor co-PI S. Riser), was responsible for all deployments and 
record-keeping on the cruise, with assistance from the Palmer's marine 
technicians for all deployments. The two SIO Oceanographic Data Facility 
nutrient technicians (S. Becker and M. Miller) and the SIO alkalinity technician 
(D. Cervantes from the A. Dickson laboratory) also assisted with several 
deployments to gain experience in the event that they will be on ships that 
deploy such biogeochemical floats in the future. 


Table 18.1: Deployment and profile Information as of 14 May 2014 
   
           P16S   WMO                                                                             Number of
    Float  Sta.  number   Equipped  Reporting  Deployment     Lat.        Lon.      Days/         profiles
     ID     #    (Argo)   Sensors*  Sensors*   date (UTC)                           cycle  Max p  5/11/14
--  -----  ----  -------  --------  ---------  ----------  ----------  -----------  -----  -----  -----------------------
 1  6091    1    5904179  IONF      OF         26/03/2014  60 0.0 S    173 57.8 E    10    2000   5
 2  7557    2    5904181  IONF      ONF        28/03/2014  60 29.27 S  176 00.66 W   10    1500   5
 3  7567    3    5904182  IONF      OF         30/03/2014  65 41.17 S  161 55.34 W   10    1800   2 (4/21 most recent**)
 4  7613    4    5904180  IONF      ONF        31/03/2014  66 30.64 S  155 59.47 W   10    1600   2 (4/11 most recent**)
 5  7614    5    5904183  IONF      ONF        01/04/2014  67 00.82 S  149 59.97 W   10    1600   3 (4/22 most recent**)
 6  9091   11    5904184  IONFp     ONFp       03/04/2014  63 59.55 S  150 01.36 W   10    1400   4
 7  9092   17    5904185  IONFp     ONFp       07/04/2014  59 59.54 S  150 01.18 W   10    1600   4
 8  9031   27    5904396  ONFp      ONFp       11/04/2014  55 0.34 S   150 01.04 W    5    1500   7
 9  9018   32    5904186  Op        Op         13/04/2014  52 29.33 S  150 0.61 W     5    1600   8
10  9095   37    5904188  ONFp      ONFp       14/04/2014  49 59.23 S  149 59.44 W    5    1600   6
11  9101   45    5904187  Op        Op         18/04/2014  44 58.43 S  149 59.55 W    5    1700   5
12  9254   53    5904395  ONFp      ONFp       20/04/2014  39 39.40 S  149 58.96 W    5    1600   5

*Sensors: I = ice enabled (software)    O = oxygen    N = nitrate    F = FLbb    p = pH 
** Most likely ice-covered thereafter, will report after emerging from ice 


Typical deployment procedure was relatively simple. After finishing the CTD cast 
at a deployment location, the Palmer would relocate to ~1 km off station and 
then proceed at about 1-2 knots in whatever direction offered the most shelter to 
the deployment. Hennon, along with one NBP ASC marine technician and one 
additional assistant (either a second MT or an SIO chemistry technician), then 
would lower the float from the stern to the water with a rope. This proved to be 
moderately challenging, given that the sea state was usually quite rough. 
Following deployment, the ship made a wide arc back to its steaming direction, 
ensuring that it did not pass over the deployment location. 


Figure 18.1: RVIB N.B. Palmer (NBP1403) float deployment locations and 
             subsequent tracks (red), with P16S CLIVAR stations (black x's) (20 
             March - 5May, 2014). Float ID numbers are listed in Table 1; WMO 
             numbers for access to data on the Argo servers are listed in Table 
             1. Light curves are the standard Orsi fronts (subtropical, 
             subantarctic, polar and southern boundary, from north to south). 
             The Ross Sea lies south of the southern boundary, and sea ice has 
             already advanced over the southernmost 3 floats. 


All 12 floats reported their first profiles on time and several profiles 
thereafter, with information and data posted on both 
http://www.mbari.org/chemsensor/floatviz.htm (biogeochemical site, plots, data 
sets) and http://runt.ocean.washington.edu/ (float tracking, engineering data, 
profiles). All oxygen, pH and FLbb sensors and 8 of the 10 ISUS nitrate sensors 
(exceptions are floats 6091, 7567) are producing good data. Of the 49 floats 
with nitrate sensors built at MBARI, these are the first two that did not 
respond on deployment. Engineering data indicate that the nitrate sensor on 
float 7567 is not responding because the persistent power interface (PPI) on the 
float is not operating properly and the nitrate sensor is not receiving power. 
This float appears to have had a significant shock on launch, as several other 
subsystems operated abnormally on the first profile. Operation of the other 
subsystems was restored, with the exception of the PPI. Loss of the nitrate 
sensor on 6091 has not been understood, at this time. The sensor communicated 
properly during predeployment tests. All systems in the float itself are 
operating normally after deployment, but there are no communications being 
received from the sensor. 


Individual float deployment concerns (no issues for floats not listed):

6091: The Palmer was steaming close to 3-4 knots to try to protect the back 
      deck(deployment location) from bad weather. The nitrate sensor did not 
      work for unknown reasons. 

7567: A wave pushed float 7567 against the ship when the float was still 
      attached to the deployment line. Initially this didn't cause concern, as 
      there was not a violent collision. However, the data returned from the 
      first profile (~12 hours after deployment) indicated severe problems and 
      possible entry of saltwater into the float. Fortunately the 2nd profile 
      was normal, with the exception of a nonfunctional nitrate sensor. 
      Currently, it is unclear what caused the problems or if the float will 
      continue operating normally. It is now presumably under ice along with two 
      of the other floats and we will only learn more in the austral spring when 
      they emerge.

7614: The line tangled during deployment. After a couple minutes we were able to 
      shake the float free, but there were incidents of low speed (~10 cm/s) 
      contacts between the iridium antenna and the ship's hull. The float has 
      since reported back and is fully functional.

9031: Deployed in big swell, but there was no contact with ship to cause 
      concern. The Palmer was steaming 4-5 knots during the deployment to 
      protect the back deck from incoming waves. The bad conditions also 
      prevented the ship from steaming off the CTD station until all the 
      sampling was completed in order to limit the wash upon the deck (CTD 
      sampling was outdoors at this point). This caused the float to be deployed 
      about 2.5 hours after the conclusion of the CTD cast, but this is not a 
      concern as the location was close, and the first float profiles are 
      normally 12 to 24hours later in any case. 


Deployment Information (Original Log) 


18.2.  Float data and engineering information (14 May 2014) 

The data and performance information from the 12 floats deployed on NBP1403 are 
available in near real-time and delayed mode from four servers, each with a 
unique purpose (Table 18.2). 


Table 18.2: Profiling float data servers 

Server                           url                                           Purpose 
-------------------------------  --------------------------------------------  ---------------------------------
U. Washington Argo float server  http://runt.ocean.washington.edu              U.W. float summaries, 
                                                                               diagnostics, engineering 
                                                                               data, profiles 
Floatviz (MBARI)                 http://www.mbari.org/chemsensor/floatviz.htm  Float profile data including all 
                                                                               sensors, quality controlled data 
U.S. GODAE Argo GDAC             http://www.usgodae.org                        Real-time and delayed-mode Argo 
                                                                               data server (U.S.), high 
                                                                               resolution T/S 
JCOMMOPS Argo data server        http://argo.jcommops.org/ (links to US        Real-time and delayed-mode Argo
                                      GODAE for data access)                   data server (international), high 
                                                                               resolution T/S 



18.2.a.  Temperature/salinity profiles reporting to Argo data servers 

The high resolution temperature/salinity data (2 m vertical resolution above 
1000 m) from all 12 floats are available according to Argo protocols from the 
U.S. GODAE and JCOMMOPS servers, listed in Table 2. (The U.S. GODAE server is 
the U.S. mirror site for JCOMMOPS.) The WMO numbers for each float are provided 
above in Table 1, and are also listed on the floatviz.htm website. 


18.2.b.  Float information and statistics to U. Washington data server 

The U. Washington profiling float website tracks each of the Apex floats that 
have been built at U. Washington. This NBP1403 group of 12 is displayed with the 
Southern Ocean floats. Information about each float can be accessed by clicking 
on the float ID (Table 1 and Figure 1). This website provides plots 
(trajectories, profiles, and a large amount of additional information about each 
float's performance, that are not provided by the Argo data server websites. The 
U.W. website does not provide the data sets themselves. 


18.2.c.  T, S, oxygen, nitrate, pH, fluorescence (chlorophyll) and backscatter 
         data to MBARI floatviz data server 

The MBARI floatviz.htm website provides both the data sets and visualization 
tools for the biogeochemical and physical parameters collected by these floats, 
as well as many other floats outfitted by MBARI (K. Johnson). The complete data 
sets at the lower resolution of the chemistry data (~70 vertical samples on each 
profile) for each of the 12 floats are posted and are public. 

There are two versions of each data set: non-QC (raw data) and QC (adjusted 
data, with quality control flags). International and U.S. Argo are just 
beginning to decide how to work with and format data other than temperature and 
salinity; eventually the chemistry data posted at floatviz will be available 
through Argo. 


18.3.  Data quality 

We have just begun assessing the quality of the new data sets. The NB Palmer 
P16S CLIVAR observations included a full suite of carbon-related measurements 
(DIC, alkalinity, pH), nutrients, oxygen, temperature and salinity, and many 
other chemical and physical quantities, all measured at the highest possible 
international standards of accuracy and precision. The pH and nitrate data from 
the floats are already being checked against the shipboard measurements. The 
CTD/rosette profiling included a fluorescence sensor, which can be used for 
comparison with the float fluorescence data. A full optical program was also 
aboard from NASA, for ocean color satellite validation, and therefore high 
quality in situ data in the upper 200 m are also available for comparison with 
the float optical sensors (Wetlabs FLbb); water samples were collected for 
pigment analysis. 

As discussed in Appendix 18.A, it appears that the pH sensors were likely coated 
with TBT anti-foulant that biased the calibration and first profile of each 
float. The TBT was rapidly removed and subsequent profiles have been extremely 
stable. Surface pH values on profiles subsequent to the first are stable to 
about +/-0.005 pH (1 std. deviation for all data in the upper 50 m) for up to 6 
profiles and one month in the water, as shown in Figure 18.3. 


Fig. 18.2: In situ pH values in the upper 50 m for all float profiles except the 
           first, from all 7 floats with pH sensors. The plot was generated from 
           the FloatViz web site. Cooling without deep mixing drives pH up, 
           while deep mixing lowers pH. 


A full set of plots comparing the float and P16S in situ observations of oxygen, 
nitrate and pH is available as a powerpoint; an example for one float is shown 
in Figure 18.3. The profile shapes are excellent. Calibration offsets are being 
calculated and applied. As part of the learning curve, it appears that 
laboratory calibrations of the pH and nitrate sensors were affected by an 
inadvertent presence of antifoulant (see long email discussion from K. Johnson, 
Appendix 18.A). 


Figure 18.3: Comparison of shipboard measurements ("cast data") and (float 
             measurements from the first two profiles of float 9095, as an 
             example of the comparisons made as soon as profiles were available. 


Data were adjusted to match deep (1000-1600 m) data for nitrate and pH. Oxygen 
was adjusted so that the mean of all sensor measurements in air (one measurement 
is made on each profile) match air oxygen partial pressure. The first float 
profiles occur within 24 hours and several kilometers of the rosette cast. The 
initial offset of the pH profile is likely due to the presence of 
antifoulant during laboratory calibration and will not be an issue in the future. 





Appendix 18.A 



(Mis-)Calibration of the Deep-Sea DuraFET pH sensors (extracted and edited from 
 an e-mail of May 7, 2014 from K. Johnson to P. Milne, L. Clough, L. Talley, J. 
                                   Sarmiento)



There's a bit of a story about why our pH pre-deployment calibrations did not 
meet our expectations of being absolute. This is what we think happened. The 
float CTDs have a TBT anti-fouling plug in the circulating seawater line, which 
constantly pumps ambient seawater through the CTD. We do the final, absolute 
calibration of the sensor to pH with the whole sensor installed on the float 
endcap and plumbed into the CTD flow stream. Normally, the TBT antifouling plug 
on the CTD should be removed for pH/nitrate calibration because the flow stream 
is recirculated during lab calibration, with a dummy in its place. But a new 
employee didn't get the message and we received the CTD's with TBT loaded. That 
has been verified. It's hard for us to tell if the TBT is present because the 
dummy TBT plug would be installed to provide the same mass during ballasting at 
UW and it looks just like the real thing. In any case, the final calibration 
took place with a small volume of Tris buffer at pH 8.2 recirculating through 
the TBT plug and TBT concentrations would have been quite high. TBT is very 
surface active, it's an organic metal oxide with a strong affinity for the oxide 
on the gate of the pH sensor, and it would have coated the pH sensor, resulting 
in an offset calibration. 

Coincidentally, we actually do two pH sensor calibrations. The first, for the 
sensor T and P response, is done in dilute HCl (the only solution we really know 
the proton activity properties of at high P) before the pH sensor is installed 
on the CTD and before the sensor would have seen TBT. The HCl and Tris 
calibrations normally produce very similar reference potentials for the sensor, 
but this time they did not. Unfortunately, we just did not do the comparison of 
the reference potential in HCl and Tris before we shipped the floats. It wasn't 
part of our protocol. The HCl calibration definitely has more error than the 
Tris calibration because its pH is so far from that of seawater (calibration at 
pH 2 to measure seawater pH near 8). When we applied the Tris calibration 
reference potential to the float data, the results for pH were way off, with 
large but constant offsets. But the HCl calibration gave pH values that were 
just about right on. In some cases, they're just right, in some case a little 
bit of adjustment is needed to bring sensor pH into agreement with the ship pH. 
The only way we can explain the weird Tris calibration is that something had 
coated the pH sensing surface and altered the sensor output during calibration. 

One other bit of evidence for contamination by TBT during the pH sensor 
calibration was that the first profile for each sensor had an even larger 
offset, that went away after one profile. Just as if something like adsorbed TBT 
was dissolving off the sensor. This also impacted the nitrate sensor and the 
first nitrate profiles are a bit odd too, with constant offsets that have since 
gone away. Coincidentally, TBT has a strong UV absorbance, which would affect 
the ISUS's spectrophotometric nitrate measurement. Normally, the TBT is not a 
problem when the float is deployed because levels are low as water constantly 
flows through the system, but during our lab calibrations it just recirculates 
and concentrations can build up. We're kind of picking on TBT, but it was the 
one anomaly in the calibration process that we can identify and the effects 
makes sense. 

So we're now processing the data using the HCl calibrations, in some cases with 
a small, constant offset added to account for non-linearities in sensor response 
that don't matter when calibrated near the pH it's measuring. Because of the TBT 
issue, we've ignored the first profile for all the floats and are only looking 
at profile 2 and on. 

The pH delta for pH from TA/DIC minus spectrophotometric pH has a standard 
deviation around 0.002 to 0.003 pH on each profile. The pH delta for sensor 
minus spectrophotometric pH is larger, about 0.007. Partly, that larger standard 
deviation is due to the problem of matching profiles at different times and in 
the upper ocean where gradients can be pretty steep. But even in the deeper 
water where concentrations should be more nearly invariant, the scatter for the 
sensor pH delta is a bit larger than the pH delta derived from measurements on a 
seawater sample. So we likely don't quite have the precision that the shipboard 
measurements do, but CLIVAR shipboard laboratory measurements of all properties 
are the "gold standard" and no autonomous sensors on Argo floats match the 
accuracy of these highest quality benchmark measurements. On the other hand, 
these floats will be out there for 5 years and will provide the first complete 
annual cycles of pH observed anywhere in Antarctic waters over many years, thus 
demonstrating, as for other sensors, the value of the combination of (i) high 
accuracy shipboard measurements against which to compare autonomous sensors with 
(ii) the many years of autonomous measurements that cannot be made from ships. 





19.  NASA OCEAN BIOLOGY/BIOGEOCHEMISTRY PROGRAM

     NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, 
     Ocean Ecology Branch, Field Support Group 

     Participating team members: 

     Joaquín E. Chaves 
     Scott A. Freeman 
     Michael G. Novak 


The NASA Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC), Field Support Group participated in 
the 2014 P16S CLIVAR Repeat Hydrography campaign on board the R/V Nathaniel B. 
Palmer. The campaign departed from the Australian port of Hobart, Tasmania, on 
March 20, 2014, and arrived in Papeete, French Polynesia, on May 5, 2014. 
Measurements were mainly conducted along 150°W from the Ross Sea section of the 
Southern Ocean at 67°S, to the tropical waters of the SW Pacific Ocean at 
approximately 16°S. In addition to the 150°W meridian sampling, NASA deployed 
during five stations between Hobart and 67°S immediately preceding 
biogeochemical ARGO float deployments. The floats were equipped with WET Labs 
Inc., backscattering and chlorophyll fluorescence sensors, which can be compared 
to instruments on our IOP package. 


19.1.  NASA Science Objectives 

The P16S campaign presented a valuable opportunity to collect in-water optical 
measurements concurrently with phytoplankton pigments and other biogeochemical 
parameters to support NASA's satellite ocean color validation activities at 
GSFC. 

Phytoplankton pigments, taxonomy, and biogeochemical measurements 

Near-surface samples (~2 m) were collected for HPLC analysis of phytoplankton 
pigments, particulate organic carbon (POC), dissolved organic carbon (DOC), and 
spectral particulate (ap), and CDOM (ag) absorptions. Samples for the 
determination of phytoplankton taxonomy and cell abundance were also collected. 
For the parameters above, surface samples were collected with a peristaltic pump 
outfitted with an acid-clean silicon hose deployed over the side while on 
station. Additional subsurface samples from two depths within the photic zone (< 
150 m) were collected from the CTD rosette at stations where concurrent optical 
measurements were conducted. The depths for these subsurface samples were chosen 
based on the location of the chlorophyll maximum. One sample was collected from 
the Niskin bottle nearest to the chlorophyll maximum, and one either above or 
below that feature. All filtration and cold sample preservation were conducted 
on board. Samples were transported to NASA-GSFC for further analyses. In 
addition to the samples processed and stored for on shore determination, ag was 
also measured on board on all CDOM samples shortly after collection on two 
UltraPath liquid waveguide systems (WPI, Inc.; Figure 19.1). An inventory of all 
samples collected for each parameter is presented in Table 19.1. 

The NASA team also collected CDOM samples for Norm Nelson at UCSB. Samples were 
collected at 16 stations from the rosette casts along the P16S line. Samples 
were collected once daily every other day from the top 9 depths and from 9 
additional depths down the bottom. 

In-Water Optical Measurements (AOPs, IOPs) 

The package to measure inherent optical properties (IOPs) was equipped with two 
attenuation and absorption spectrometers (ac-s, ac-9; WET Labs, Inc.). The ac-9 
was equipped with a 0.2 um pre-filter to allow the in situ measurement of ap. 
The IOP package also included two scattering meters (bb-9, VSF-9; WET Labs, 
Inc.), and a Sea Bird SBE 45 CTD. The ac-s and ac-9 meters measure absorption 
and attenuation (and total scattering by difference) at 90 and 9 wavelengths, 
respectively, between 400 and 740 nm, while the bb-9 measures backscatter at 9 
wavelengths and 117°. The VSF-9 measures scattering at 9 angles from 60° to 170° 
at 532 nm. The package performed casts down to 200m depth at 37 stations during 
the campaign (Table 19.2). 

Apparent optical properties (AOPs), both downwelling irradiance (Ed) and 
upwelling radiance (Lu), were measured using a Satlantic, Inc., HyperPro 
radiometer during 14 of the 16 stations where AOP measurements were conducted 
(Table 19.3). Unfortunately, during the deployment on station 80 the HyperPro 
was lost due to contact between the instrument cable and the ship propeller. For 
the last two stations where AOP deployments were possible, a Biospherical 
Instruments C-OPS system was used. For both instrument systems, incoming solar 
irradiance (Es) was measured with a matching reference radiometer. The HyperPro 
system measured radiance and irradiance at 255 wavelengths between 305 and 1140 
nm, while the C-OPS measured the same parameters at 19 wavelengths between 305 
and 900 nm. AOP measurements were conducted once daily within ± 2 h of local 
solar noon when weather conditions permitted down to the 1% of surface light 
level. 

Additionally, we conducted solar radiometry at six stations using a Microtops 
Sun Photometer. The Microtops is a small, handheld instrument, which measures 
solar radiance at five wavelengths. These data will be incorporated into the 
AERONET database. 

Underway IOP Measurements 

During the entire campaign, with the exception of the transit through the 
Australian EEZ, we conducted IOP measurements with an underway system that 
included an ac-s meter, a VSF-3 scattering meter, and two fluorometers for 
chlorophyll and CDOM, respectively. All the above instruments in the underway 
system are from WET Labs, Inc. In addition to the optical instruments, the 
system included a SeaBird SBE45 thermosalinograph and a Sequoia Inc. valve flow 
control unit, which switched hourly between whole seawater and 0.2 um filtered 
water to measure ap. Three times per day, distilled water was run through the 
entire system to calibrate the ac-s and VSF-3. Because the same ac-s was used in 
the IOP package, the underway system was turned off while at stations. It 
performed very well throughout; however as the campaign progressed into warmer 
subtropical and tropical waters, biofouling from algae growth was noticeable in 
the lines that fed the ship clean seawater into the system. Further comparisons 
with other in situ measurements conducted during the cruise will be necessary to 
validate the data collected by the underway system, particularly during the 
second half of the campaign. 


19.2.  Tables and Figures 


Table 19.1: Biogeochemical samples collected during the P16S campaign by the 
            NASA team. 

        Parameter                          Number of samples collected
        ---------------------------------  ---------------------------
        HPLC Pigments                                 261
        ap                                            187
        POC                                           357
        ag                                            143
        DOC                                           513
        Phytoplankton abundance, taxonomy             176
        Total                                        1637



Table 19.2: Inherent optical properties (IOPs) instrument casts during the P16S 
            CLIVAR campaign. 
                                                                          Sky             Wind
                                                                         Condi-   Wind   direc-
Date UTC,  Beg time,  end time,  Sta-   Latitude,    Longitude,  Depth,  tions,  speed,   tion,
yyymmdd      UTC        UTC      tion   dec. deg.    dec. deg.     m       %       m/s    deg.
---------  ---------  ---------  ----  -----------  -----------  ------  ------  ------  ------
20140326   7:05:03    7:14:59      1   -60.0013833   174.00135    4514   dark      15      300
20140326   7:42:55    8:18:29      1   -60.0013833   174.00135    4514   dark      15      300
20140328   3:52:14    4:24:03      2   -63.4997833  -176.000166   3275   100       17      105
20140330   6:53:04    7:27:20      3   -65.6917666  -161.894633   4096   dark      14      260
20140331   0:31:30    1:04:37      4   -66.4994166  -155.999933   4056   100        7      160
20140331   20:52:11   21:25:10     5   -67.0002833  -149.998583   4021   100        5      200
20140401   23:06:19   23:39:09     8   -65.48895    -150.019783   3275   100        9      320
20140403   7:43:44    8:13:41     11   -63.9984166  -150.000233   3268   dark      20      260
20140406   20:14:59   20:46:14    16   -58.9981833  -149.999583   2700   100       17      300
20140407   3:46:26    4:18:33     17   -60          -149.9996     2743   100       15      290
20140407   22:00:18   22:33:25    19   -61.00005    -150.000083   3200   100       11      300
20140409   4:24:22    4:44:14     22   -57.5001333  -149.998633   3364   dark      16      295
20140410   3:54:17    4:25:23     25   -55.9997666  -149.999366   3416   dark      16      273
20140411   7:56:28    8:27:08     27   -54.9995     -150.000916   3768   dark      10      220
20140411   8:40:07    9:09:31     27   -54.99955    -150.000916   3768   dark      10      220
20140411   22:26:07   22:58:46    29   -54.0067333  -149.999333   3255   100       10      295
20140412   21:11:42   21:45:46    32   -52.4994166  -149.998733   4661   100       14      330
20140413   22:57:00   23:30:11    35   -51.0005333  -150.000416   4951   100       14      110
20140414   9:47:42    10:20:42    37   -50.00121    -150.000198   4257   dark      10       41
20140414   21:25:05   21:48:38    38   -49.5000666  -150.000083   4177   100        8      335
20140415   20:18:22   20:45:39    40   -48.3336333  -149.999966   4865   100       13      310
20140416   23:55:33   0:25:27     43   -46.336345   -149.99083    5229   30        10      290
20140417   22:34:12   23:04:50    45   -44.99985    -150.000833   5310   60        17      212
20140418   22:44:23   23:13:46    48   -42.9957     -149.997866   5194   100        4      198
20140420   1:25:16    1:54:39     51   -41.0031     -149.999733   5622   90         5       64
20140420   23:09:36   23:37:35    53   -39.6671666  -149.9999     5269   100       15       80
20140422   5:04:07    5:34:03     56   -37.666615   -149.999893   5636   dark      15       80
20140423   1:16:55    1:48:57     58   -36.3290666  -149.992683   5855   70        10      263
20140423   22:59:56   23:27:24    60   -35.0000333  -150          5279   20         8      270
20140424   20:19:04   20:44:46    63   -33.0003833  -149.999916   5458   100      10.5      14
20140425   0:40:05    1:07:45     66   -31.0000333  -149.999366   4259   50        12       12
20140426   21:52:34   22:20:15    68   -29.6662166  -150.000566   4223   30        13      220
20140427   22:50:34   23:18:08    71   -27.6670833  -149.999633   4398   100        6      167
20140428   19:51:43   20:15:37    74   -25.6668     -150          4516   50         9      181
20140429   20:49:46   21:15:59    77   -23.66645    -149.9999     4737   40        11      157
20140430   21:52:21   22:20:43    80   -21.666683   -150.000166   4691   30        10      160
20140501   21:38:14   22:03:40    83   -19.6666333  -149.999833   3974   30         6      130
20140502   21:51:11   22:00:08    86   -17.6668666  -150.000066   5632   30         3       97
20140502   22:08:12   22:35:20    86   -17.6668666  -150.000066   5632   30         3       97
20140503   22:20:13   22:47:10    89   -15.666      -150.0082     4064   50         8      105
 
 
 
Table 19.3:  Apparent optic al properties (AOPs) casts during the P16S CLIVAR 
             campaign.  
                                                                          Sky             Wind
                                                                         Condi-   Wind   direc-
Date UTC,  Beg time,  end time,  Sta-   Latitude,    Longitude,  Depth,  tions,  speed,   tion,
yyymmdd      UTC        UTC      tion   dec. deg.    dec. deg.     m       %       m/s    deg.
---------  ---------  ---------  ----  -----------  -----------  ------  ------  ------  ------
20140331   1:12:33    1:26:30      4   -66.4994     -155.9999     4056    100       7      160
20140331   21:49:37   22:02:07     5   -67.0002     -149.99858    4021    100       5      200
20140401   22:39:16   22:51:52     8   -65.4875     -150.02902    3275    100       9      320
20140411   23:07:33   23:19:52    29   -54.0064     -149.9104     3255    100      10      290
20140416   23:24:54   23:37:43    43   -46.336345   -149.9908     5229     30      10      290
20140418   22:14:10   22:26:34    48   -42.99955    -149.9997     5194    100       4      194
20140420   1:01:14    1:15:03     51   -41.0022     -149.999725   5622     90       5       64
20140423   0:46:18    1:01:46     58   -36.33223    -149.998183   5910     90      10      270
20140423   23:39:22   23:54:47    60   -34.999633   -149.998266   5248     20       8      262
20140424   20:57:20   21:02:47    63   -33.0035     -149.9998     5750    100      10       10
20140424   21:15:38   21:24:44    63   -33.0035     -149.9998     5750    100      10       10
20140427   23:27:15   23:40:16    71   -27.666183   -149.99923    4423     90       5      200
20140427   23:41:01   23:49:47    71   -27.66618    -149.9992     4423     90       5      200
20140428   23:52:35   23:57:21    74   -25.6667     -150.0001     4527     60      10      180
20140429   21:24:46   21:46:43    77   -23.666483   -149.9999     4737     60      11      157
20140430   22:28:07   22:40:16    80   -21.66668    -150.0003     4690     30      12      155
20140501   22:41:33   22:46:14    83   -19.664906   -149.99989    3991     30       5      125
20140501   22:49:37   22:52:52    83   -19.66490    -149.99989    3991     30       5      125
20140501   22:59:46   23:03:47    83   -19.664906   -149.99989    3991     30       5      125
20140501   23:05:20   23:08:14    83   -19.664906   -149.9998     3991     30       5      125
20140503   21:51:52   21:54:05    89   -15.6663     -150.0017     4217     50       8      120
20140503   22:00:13   22:04:35    89   -15.666366   -150.0017     4217     50       8      120
20140503   22:04:00   22:06:23    89   -15.6663666  -150.0017     4217     50       8      120



Figure 19.1: Spectral absorption coefficient of CDOM from surface samples 
             collected during the P16S CLIVAR campaign. 












                               DATA REPORT NBP1403


                          March 20, 2014 - May 5, 2014





                            RVIB Nathaniel B. Palmer
                        United States Antarctic Program
                          Antarctic Support Contractor
                    Prepared by Joe Tarnow and Bryan Chambers




Data Report NBP1403 

                               Table of Contents

INTRODUCTION 
DISTRIBUTION CONTENTS AT A GLANCE 
EXTRACTING DATA 
DISTRIBUTION CONTENTS 
CRUISE INFORMATION  
  Cruise Track  
  Satellite Images  
NBP DATA PRODUCTS  
  MGD77 
SCIENCE OF OPPORTUNITY  
  ADCP  
  pCO2  
CRUISE SCIENCE 
  XBT 
RVDAS 
  Sensors and Instruments  
    Underway Sensors  
      Meteorology and Radiometry  
      Geophysics  
      Oceanography  
    Navigational Instruments  
  Data  
    Underway Data /rvdas/uw  
      Sound Velocity Probe (svp1)  
      Meteorology (mwx1)  
      MET string  
      PUS string  
      SUS string  
      Knudsen (knud)  
      Fluorometer (flr1)  
      pCO2 (pco2)  
      Micro-TSG (tsg1)  
      Micro-TSG #2 (tsg2)  
      Gravimeter (grv1)  
      Engineering (eng1)  
      Hydro-DAS (hdas)  
      GUV Data (pguv)  
      Remote Temperature (rtmp)  
      Oxygen Data (oxyg)  
    Winch Data (bwnc, twnc, cwnc)  
      Navigational Data /rvdas/nav  
      Seapath GPS (seap)  
      Trimble (P-Code) GPS (PCOD)  
      Gyro Compass (gyr1)  
      ADCP Course (adcp)  
    Processed Data /process/  
      pCO2-merged  
      Calculations  
PAR  
PSP  
PIR  

ACQUISITION PROBLEMS AND EVENTS 26 

APPENDIX: SENSORS AND CALIBRATIONS 27 



Antarctic Support Contract                       United States Antarctic Program 





Data Report NBP1403 

Introduction 

The NBP data acquisition systems continuously log data from the instruments used 
during the cruise. 
This document describes: 

• The structure and organization of the data on the distribution media 

• The format and contents of the data strings 

• Formulas for calculating values 

• Information about the specific instruments in use during the cruise 

• A log of acquisition problems and events during the cruise that may affect the 
  data 

• Scanned calibration sheets for the instruments in use during the cruise. 

The data is distributed on a DVD-R written in written in UDF format. It is 
readable by most modern computer platforms. 

All the data has been compressed using Unix "gzip," identified by the ".tz" 
extension. It has been copied to the distribution media in the Unix tar archive 
format, ".tar" extension. Tools are available on all platforms for uncompressing 
and de-archiving these formats: On Macintosh, one can use Stuffit Expander with 
DropStuff. On Windows operating systems, one can use WinZip or 7zip. 

MultiBeam and raw ADCP data are distributed separately. 

IMPORTANT: Read the last section, "Acquisition Problems and Events," for 
important information that may affect the processing of this data. 





Antarctic Support Contract                       United States Antarctic Program 



Data Report NBP1403 



20.  Distribution Contents at a Glance 

Volume 1 of 1: NBP1403 
File                                   Description 
                                       
/                                      Root level directory 
             NBP1403.trk                 Text file of cruise track (lat,lon) 
             NBP1403.mgd                 Full Cruise MGD77 data file 
             NBP1403.gmt                 GMT binary file of MGD77 data 
             INSTCOEF.TXT                Instrument Coefficient File 
             1403DATA.docx               Data Report NBP1403 (MS Word) 
             1403DATA.pdf                Data Report NBP1403 (PDF format) 
                                       
/cal-sheets                            Calibration Sheets 
             NBP1403-Sensors.doc         Sensor Calibration Sheet Reference 
             NBP1403-CalSheets.zip       Sensor Calibration Sheet files 
                                       
/plots                                 Cruise track plots 
             CruiseTrackMap.jpeg         Cruise track plot (JPEG format) 
             WebCruiseTrackMap.jpeg      Cruise track plot (PNG format) 
                                       
/process                               Processed data 
             1403JGOF.tz                 JGOFS format data files 
             1403QC.tz                   Daily RVDAS QC postcript plots 
             1403PCO2.tz                 Merged pCO2 data files 
             1403MGD.tz                  MGD Data 
             1403PROC.tz                 Other processed data 
                                         
/rvdas/nav                             Navigation data 
             1403dcp.tz                  ADCP Data Sets 
             1403gyr1.tz                 Gyro raw data 
             1403PCOD.tz                 Trimble P-code raw data 
             1403seap.tz                 Seapath data 
                                         
/rvdas/uw                              Underway data 
             1403Abwnc.tz                Baltic winch data 
             1403Actdd.tz                CTD depth data 
             1403Aeng1.tz                Engineering data 
             1403Ahdas.tz                HydroDAS raw data 
             1403Aknud.tz                Knudsen raw data 
             1403Ambdp.tz                Multibeam depth data 
             1403Amwx1.tz                Meteorology raw data 
             1403Aoxyg.tz                Oxygen sensor 
             1403Apco2.tz                pCO2 raw data 
             1403Apguv.tz                GUV raw data 
             1403Artmp.tz                Sound velocity probe (in ADCP well) 
             1403Atsg1.tz                Micro TSG data 
             1403Atsg2.tz                2nd Micro TSG data 
                                       
/Imagery                               Satellite Imagery 
             1403Imagery.tz              Collection of Imagery Files 
                                       
/ocean                                 Ocean data 
             1403ctd.tz                  CTD Data 
                                       
                                       Raw multibeam data 
                                       
                                       


Antarctic Support Contract                       United States Antarctic Program 



Data Report NBP1403 

Extracting Data 

The Unix tar command has many options. It is often useful to know exactly how an 
archive was produced when expanding its contents. All archives are gzipped tar 
files and were created using the command, 

    tar -czvf archive_filename files_to_archive 

To create a list of the files in the archive, use the Unix command, 

    tar -tvf archive_filename > contents.list 

where contents.list is the name of the file to create 

To extract the files from the archive: 

    tar -xvf archive_filename file(s)_to_extract 

G-zipped files will have a ".tz" extension on the filename. ".tz" stands for 
tared and gziped. These files can be decompressed after de-archiving, using the 
Unix command, 

    gunzip filename.tz 




Antarctic Support Contract                       United States Antarctic Program 


Data Report NBP1403 

20.3.  Distribution Contents 


Cruise Information 

NBP1403 departed Hobart, Tasmania on March 20, 2014 
Data logging was started on March 20, 2014 08:15 UTC 
Data logging was ended on May 04, 2014 16:00 UTC 



Cruise Track 

The distribution DVD includes a GMT cruise track file (NBP1403.trk). It contains 
the longitude and latitude of the ship's position at one-minute intervals 
extracted from the NBP1403.gmt file. 

JPEG cruise track files have been produced and placed in the /plots directory. 


Satellite Images 

Satellite Images received for this cruise can be found in the file called 
/Imagery/1403Imagery.tar. Each type of image is contained in a .tz file within 
that file. 


NBP Data Products 

The IT staff on the NBP creates two processed data products for every cruise: 
JGOFS and MGD77. 

The data processing scripts used to produce JGOFS and MGD77 data sets create a 
lot of intermediate files. These files are included on the data distribution 
media in a file called /process/1403proc.tar. These files are not intended to be 
end-products. They are included to make re-processing easier in the event of an 
error, but no extensive detail of the formats is included in this document. If 
you have any questions, please contact itvessel@usap.gov. 














Antarctic Support Contract                       United States Antarctic Program 


Data Report NBP1403 

JGOFS 

The JGOFS data set can be found on the distribution media in the file 
/process/1403jgof.tar. The archive contains one file produced for each day named 
jgDDD.dat.tz, where DDD is the year-day the data was acquired. The ".tz" 
extension indicates that the individual files are compressed before archiving. 
Each daily file consists of 22 columnar fields in text format as described in 
the table below. The JGOFS data set is created from calibrated data decimated at 
one-minute intervals. Several fields are derived measurements from more than a 
single raw input. For example, Course Made Good (CMG) and Speed Over Ground 
(SOG) are calculated from gyro and GPS inputs. Daily plots during the cruise are 
produced from the JGOFS data set. Note: Null, unused, or unknown fields are 
indicated as "NAN" 9999 in the JGOFS data. 

Field  Data                                         Units 
-----  -------------------------------------------  ---------------------
  01   UTC date                                     dd/mm/yy 
  02   UTC time                                     hh:mm:ss 
  03   SEAPATH latitude (negative is South)         tt.tttt 
  04   SEAPATH longitude (negative is West)         ggg.gggg 
  05   Speed over ground                            Knots 
  06   GPS HDOP                                     -
  07   Gyro Heading                                 Degrees (azimuth) 
  08   Course made good                             Degrees (azimuth) 
  09   Mast PAR                                     µEinsteins/meter2 sec 
  10   Sea surface temperature (remote)             °C 
  11   Sea surface conductivity (TSG1)              siemens/meter 
  12   Sea surface salinity (TSG1)                  PSU 
  13   Sea depth                                    meters
       (uncorrected, calc. sw sound vel. 1500 m/s)  
  14   True wind speed (max speed windbird)         meters/sec 
  15   True wind direction (max speed windbird)     degrees (azimuth) 
  16   Ambient air temperature                      °C 
  17   Relative humidity                            % 
  18   Barometric pressure                          mBars 
  19   Sea surface fluorometry                      µg/l (mg/m3) 
  20   Transmissometer                              % 
  21   PSP                                          W/m2 
  22   PIR                                          W/m2 











Antarctic Support Contract                       United States Antarctic Program 




Data Report NBP1403 

MGD77 

The MGD77 data set is contained in a single file for the entire cruise. It can 
be found in the top level of the distribution data structure as NBP1403.mgd. The 
file NBP1403.gmt is created from the MGD77 dataset using the "mgd77togmt" 
utility. NBP1403.gmt can be used with the GMT plotting package. 

The data used to produce the NBP1403.mgd file can be found on the distribution 
media in the file /process/1403proc.tar. The data files in the archive contain a 
day's data and follow the naming convention Dddd.fnl.tz, where ddd is the year-
day. These files follow a space-delimited columnar format that may be more 
accessible for some purposes. They contain data at one-second intervals rather 
than one minute and are individually "gzipped" to save space. Below is a 
detailed description of the MGD77 data set format. The other files in the 
archive contain interim processing files and are included to simplify possible 
reprocessing of the data using the RVDAS NBP processing scripts. 

All decimal points are implied. Leading zeros and blanks are equivalent. Unknown 
or unused fields are filled with 9's. All "corrections", such as time zone, 
diurnal magnetics, and EOTVOS, are understood to be added. 


  Col    Len  Type  Contents                Description, Possible Values, Notes 
-------  ---  ----  ---------------------   ---------------------------------------
   1      1   Int   Data record type        Set to "5" for data record 
   2-9    8   Char  Survey identifier 
  10-12   3   int   Time zone correction    Corrects time (in characters 13-27) to 
                                            UTC when added; 0 = UTC 
  13-16   4   int   Year                    4 digit year 
  17-18   2   int   Month                   2 digit month 
  19-20   2   int   Day                     2 digit day 
  21-22   2   int   Hour                    2 digit hour 
  23-27   5   real  Minutes x 1000 
  28-35   8   real  Latitude x 100000       + = North 
                                            - = South. (-9000000 to 9000000) 
  36-44   9   real  Longitude x 100000      + = East 
                                            - = West. (-18000000 to 18000000) 
  45      1   int   Position type code      1=Observed fix 
                                            3=Interpolated 
                                            9=Unspecified 
  46-51   6   real  Bathymetry, 2-way       In 10,000th of seconds. Corrected for 
                    travel time             transducer depth and other such 
                                            corrections 
  52-57   6   real  Bathymetry, corrected   In tenths of meters.
                    depth 
  58-59   2   int   Bathymetric correction  This code details the procedure used 
                    code                    for determining the sound velocity 
                                            correction to depth 
  60      1   int   Bathymetric type code   1 = Observed 
                                            3 = Interpolated (Header Seq. 12) 
                                            9 = Unspecified 
  61-66   6   real  Magnetics total field,  In tenths of nanoteslas (gammas) 
                    1ST sensor 
  67-72   6   real  Magnetics total field,  In tenths of nanoteslas (gammas), for
                    2ND sensor              trailing sensor 
  73-78   6   real  Magnetics residual      In tenths of nanoteslas (gammas). The 
                    field                   reference field used is in Header Seq. 13 
  79      1   int   Sensor for residual     1 = 1st or leading sensor 
                    field                   2 = 2nd or trailing sensor 
                                            9 = Unspecified 
  80-84   5   real  Magnetics diurnal       In tenths of nanoteslas (gammas). (In 
                    correction              nanoteslas) if 9-filled (i.e., set to 
                                            "+9999"), total and residual fields 
                                            are assumed to be uncorrected; if 
                                            used, total and residuals are assumed 
                                            to have been already corrected. 
  85-90   6   F6.0  Depth or altitude of    (In meters)
                    magnetics sensor        + = Below sea level 
                                            3 = Above sea level 
  91-97   7   real  Observed gravity        In 10th of mgals. Corrected for 
                                            Eotvos, drift, tares 
 98-103   6   real  EOTVOS correction       In 10th of mgals. 
                                            E = 7.5 V cos phi sin alpha + 0.0042 V*V 
104-108   5   real  Free-air anomaly        In 10th of mgals 
                                            G = observed 
                                            G = theoretical 
109-113   5   char  Seismic line number     Cross-reference for seismic data 
114-119   6   char  Seismic shot-point 
                    number 
120       1   int   Quality code for        5=Suspected, by the originating institution 
                    navigation              6=Suspected, by the data center 
                                            9=No identifiable problem found 

Science of Opportunity 

ADCP 

The shipboard ADCP system measures currents in a depth range from about 30 to 
300 m --in good weather. In bad weather or in ice, the range is reduced, and 
sometimes no valid measurements are made. ADCP data collection is the OPP-funded 
project of Eric Firing (University of Hawaii) and Teri Chereskin (Scripps 
Institution of Oceanography). Data is collected on both the LMG and the NBP for 
the benefit of scientists on individual cruises, and for the long-term goal of 
building a profile of current structure in the Southern Ocean. 

A data feed is sent from the ADCP system to RVDAS whenever a reference layer is 
acquired. This feed contains east and north vectors for ship's speed, relative 
to the reference layer, and ship's heading. 

Collected files (one per day) are archived in 1403adcp.tar in the directory 
/rvdas/nav. 

pCO2 

The NBP carries a pCO2 measurement system from Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory 
(LDEO). pCO2 data is recorded by RVDAS and transmitted to LDEO at the end of 
each cruise. You will find pCO2 data in a file named 1403pco2.tar in the 
/process directory, which contains the pCO2 instrument's data merged with GPS, 
meteorological and other oceanographic measurements. For more information 
contact Colm Sweeney (csweeney@ldeo.columbia.edu). 

Antarctic Support Contract                       United States Antarctic Program 


Data Report NBP1403 

Cruise Science 

XBT 

During the cruise, eXpendable BathyThermographs were used to obtain water column 
temperature profiles, providing corrections to the sound velocity profile for 
the multibeam system. The data files from these launches are included as 
1403xbt.tar in the /ocean directory. No XBTs were collected on this cruise. 

RVDAS 

The Research Vessel Data Acquisition System (RVDAS) was developed at Lamont-
Doherty Earth Observatory of Columbia University and has been in use on its 
research ship for many years. It has been extensively adapted for use on the 
USAP research vessels. 

Daily data processing of the RVDAS data is performed to calibrate and convert 
values into useable units and as a quality-control on operation of the DAS. Raw 
and processed data sets from RVDAS are included in the data distribution. The 
tables below provide detailed information on the sensors and data. Be sure to 
read the "Significant Acquisition Events" section for important information 
about data acquisition during this cruise. 

Sensors and Instruments 

RVDAS data is divided into two general categories, underway and navigation. They 
can be found on the distribution media as subdirectories under the top level 
rvdas directory: /rvdas/uw, and /rvdas/nav. Processed oceanographic data is in 
the top level directory, /process. Each instrument or sensor produces a data 
file named with its channel ID. Each data file is g-zipped to save space on the 
distribution media. Not all data types are collected every day or on every 
cruise. 

The naming convention for data files produced by the sensors and instruments is 

NBP[CruiseID][ChannelID].dDDD 

Example: NBP1403mwx1.d025 

• The CruiseID is the numeric name of the cruise, in this case, NBP1403. 
• The ChannelID is a 4-character code representing the system being logged. An 
  example is "mwx1," the designation for meteorology. 
• DDD is the day of year the data was collected 






Antarctic Support Contract                       United States Antarctic Program 



Data Report NBP1403 

UNDERWAY SENSORS 

Meteorology and Radiometry 

Measurement           Channel  Collect.       Rate    Instrument 
                      ID       Status 
--------------------  -------  -------------  ------  -------------------
Air Temperature       mwx1     continuous     1 sec   R.M. Young 41372LC 
Relative Humidity     mwx1     continuous     1 sec   R.M. Young 41372LC 
Wind Speed/Direction  mwx1     continuous     1 sec   Gill 1390-PK-062/R 
Barometer             mwx1     continuous     1 sec   R.M. Young 61201 
PIR (LW radiation)    mwx1     continuous     1 sec   Eppley PIR 
PSP (SW radiation)    mwx1     continuous     1 sec   Eppley PSP 
PAR                   mwx1     continuous     1 sec   BSI QSR-240 
GUV                   pguv     continuous     2 sec   BSI PUV-2511 
PUV                   pguv     not collected          BSI PUG-2500 

Geophysics 

Measurement           Channel  Collect.       Rate    Instrument 
                      ID       Status 
--------------------  -------  -------------  ------  -------------------
Gravimeter            grv1     continuous     1 sec   BGM-3 
Magnetometer          mag1     continuous     15 sec  EG&G G-866 
Bathymetry            knud     continuous     Varies  Knudsen 320B/R 
                                                      Knudsen 3260 

Oceanography 

Measurement           Channel  Collect.       Rate    Instrument 
                      ID       Status 
--------------------  -------  -------------  ------  -------------------
Conductivity          mtsg     Continuous     6 sec   SeaBird SBE-45 
Salinity              mtsg     Continuous     6 sec   Calc. from pri. temp 
Sea Surface Temp      mtsg     Continuous     6 sec   SeaBird SBE 38 
Fluorometry           hdas     Continuous     2 sec   WET Lab AFL 
Transmissometry       hdas     Continuous     2 sec   WET Lab C-Star 
pCO2                  pco2     Continuous     70 sec  (LDEO) 
ADCP                  adcp     Continuous     varies  RD Instruments 
Oxygen                oxyg     Continuous     10 sec  Oxygen Optode 3835 











Antarctic Support Contract                       United States Antarctic Program 



Data Report NBP1403 

Navigational Instruments 

Measurement           Channel  Collect.      Rate     Instrument 
                      ID       Status 
--------------------  -------  ------------  -------  -------------------
Trimble GPS           PCOD     Continuous    1 sec    Trimble 20636-00SM 
Gyro                  gyr1     Continuous    0.2 sec  Yokogawa Gyro 
Sea Path              seap     Continuous    1 sec    SeaPath 330 


Data 

Data are received from the RVDAS system via RS-232 serial connections. A time 
tag is added at the beginning of each line of data in the form, 

    yy+dd:hh:mm:ss.sss [data stream from instrument] 

where 

    yy     = two-digit year 
    ddd    = day of year 
    hh     = 2 digit hour of the day 
    mm     = 2 digit minute 
    ss.sss = seconds 


All times are reported in UTC. 

The delimiters that separate fields in the raw data files are often spaces and 
commas but can be other characters such as : = @. Occasionally no delimiter is 
present. Care should be taken when reprocessing the data that the field's 
separations are clearly understood. 

In the sections below a sample data string is shown, followed by a table that 
lists the data contained in the string. 
















Antarctic Support Contract                       United States Antarctic Program 



Data Report NBP1403 

Underway Data /rvdas/uw 

Each section below describes a type of data file (file name extension in 
parentheses) followed by a typical line of data in the file. In the table(s) for 
each section is a description of the fields within each line of data. Note: most 
data files listed below will be included with each cruise's data distribution; 
however some types of files may be omitted if the instrument was not operating 
during the cruise. The available data files can be found in the /rvdas/uw 
directory on the distribution disc. 

Sound Velocity Probe (svp1) 

08+330:00:00:49.011 1519.35 

Field  Data                                                     Units 
-----  -------------------------------------------------------  -----------
1      RVDAS Time tag 
2      Sound velocity in ADCP sonar well                        m/s 


Meteorology (mwx1) 

There are 3 different data strings in the mwx1 data file: 

MET 
08+330:23:59:57.725 MET,12.1,-54,6.64,88.7,111.3374,0.02414567,–
0.4827508,282.9581,281.8823,1005.119 

PUS 
08+330:23:59:58.546 PUS,A,020,008.53,M,+337.12,+009.00,00,0F 

SUS 
08+330:23:59:58.779 SUS,A,017,008.76,M,+335.53,+006.35,00,02 

MET string 

Field  Data                                                     Units 
-----  -------------------------------------------------------  -----------
 1     RVDAS time tag 
 2     MET (string flag) 
 3     Power Supply Voltage                                     V 
 4     Enclosure Relative Humidity (not currently implemented)  % 
 5     Air temperature                                          °C 
 6     Air Relative Humidity                                    % 
 7     PAR (photosynthetically available radiation)*            mV 
 8     PSP (short wave radiation)*                              mV 
 9     PIR Thermopile (long wave radiation)*                    mV 
10     PIR Case Temperature                                     °Kelvin 
11     PIR Dome Temperature                                     °Kelvin 
12     Barometer mBar 

*See page 21 for calculations. 

Antarctic Support Contract                       United States Antarctic Program 

Data Report NBP1403 

PUS string 

Field  Data                                                     Units 
-----  -------------------------------------------------------  -----------
 1     RVDAS time tag 
 2     PUS (string flag) 
 3     A (unit identification) 
 4     Port Wind direction relative                             deg 
 5     Port Wind speed relative                                 m/s 
 6     Units 
 7     Sound Speed                                              m/s 
 8     Sonic Temperature                                        °C 
 9     Unit Status (00 or 60 are good, any other value 
       indicates fault) 
10     Check Sum 

SUS string 

Field  Data                                                     Units 
-----  -------------------------------------------------------  -----------
 1     RVDAS time tag 
 2     SUS (string flag) 
 3     A (unit identification) 
 4     Starboard Wind direction relative                        deg 
 5     Starboard Wind speed relative                            m/s 
 6     Units 
 7     Sound Speed                                              m/s 
 8     Sonic Temperature                                        °C 
 9     Unit Status (00 or 60 are good, any other value  
       indicates fault)
10     Check Sum 


KNUDSEN (knud) 

99+099:00:18:19.775 3.5kHz,2540.55,0,12kHz,2540.55,,1500,-65.445954,-166.7773183 

Field  Data                                                     Units 
-----  -------------------------------------------------------  -----------
 1     RVDAS time tag 
 2     LF = Low frequency flag (3.5 kHz) 
 3     Low frequency depth                                      meters 
 4     LF quality 
 5     HF = High frequency flag (12 kHz) 
 6     High frequency depth                                     meters 
 7     HF quality 
 8     Sound Speed 
 9     Lat 
10     Lon


FLUOROMETER (flr1) 

This Fluorometer is not in use. The current Fluorometer goes to the hdas string. 

00+019:23:59:58.061 0 0818 :: 1/19/00 17:23:17 = 0.983 (RAW) 1.2 (C) 

Field  Data                                                     Units 
-----  -------------------------------------------------------  -------------
 1     RVDAS time tag 
 2     Marker 0 to 8 
 3     4-digit index 
 4     Date                                                     mm/dd/yy 
 5     Time                                                     hh:mm:ss 
 6     Signal 
 7     Signal units of measurement 
 8     Cell temperature (if temperature compensation package 
       is installed) 
 9     Temperature units (if temperature compensation package 
       is installed) 


pCO2 (pco2) 

00+021:23:59:43.190 2000021.99920 2382.4 984.2 30.73 50.8 345.9 334.1 -1.70 
68.046 -144.446 Equil 

Field  Data                                                     Units 
-----  -------------------------------------------------------  -------------
 1     RVDAS time tag 
 2     pCO2 time tag (decimal is fractional time of day)        yyyyddd.ttt 
 3     Raw voltage (IR)                                         mV 
 4     Cell temperature                                         °C 
 5     Barometer                                                MBar 
 6     Concentration                                            ppm 
 7     Equilibrated temperature                                 °C 
 8     pCO2 pressure                                            microAtm 
 9     Flow rate                                                ml/min 
10     Source ID #                                              1 or 2 digits 
11     Valve position                                           1 or 2 digits 
12     Flow source (Equil = pCO2 measurement) text 


MICRO-TSG (tsg1) 

08+330:23:59:40.894 5.9322, 3.34685, 34.0550, 1473.281 

Field  Data                                                     Units 
-----  -------------------------------------------------------  -------
 1     RVDAS time tag 
 2     Internal Temperature                                      °C  
 3     Conductivity                                              s/m 
 4     Salinity                                                  PSU 
 5     Sound velocity                                            m/s 


MICRO-TSG #2 (tsg2) 

08+330:23:59:40.894 5.9322, 3.34685, 34.0550, 1473.281 

Field  Data                                                     Units 
-----  -------------------------------------------------------  -------
 1     RVDAS time tag 
 2     Internal Temperature                                      °C  
 3     Conductivity                                              s/m 
 4     Salinity                                                  PSU 
 5     Sound velocity                                            m/s  


GRAVIMETER (grv1) 

14+050:00:01:32.363 01:025415 00 

Field  Data            Conversion                               Units 
-----  -------------------------------------------------------  -------
 1     RVDAS time tag  
 2     01: 
 3     Gravity count   mgal = count x 4.99407552 + bias         count 
 4     Error Flag 


ENGINEERING (eng1) 

13+079:10:22:16.035 12.26 19.68 507.4 0.3 173.3 -751.9 0 0 NAN NAN 43.2 85.7 

Field  Data                                                     Units 
-----  -------------------------------------------------------  -------
 1     RVDAS time tag 
 2     Power Supply Voltage                                     V 
 3     Internal Case Temperature                                °C 
 4     Pump #1 flow rate (aquarium room)                        L/min 
 5     Pump #2 flow rate (helo deck)                            L/min 
 6     Pump #3 flow rate (hydro-lab)                            L/min 
 7     Seismic air pressure                                     Lbs/sq-in 
 8     PIR case resistance (not currently hooked up,            Kohm 
       data is irrelevant) 
 9     PIR case ratiometric output (not currently hooked up,    mV 
       data is irrelevant) 
10     Freezer #1 temperature                                   °C 
11     Freezer #2 temperature                                   °C 
12     Altimeter, OIS benthic (yoyo) camera; distance from      m 
       the seafloor 
13     Transmissometer, OIS benthic (yoyo) camera               % 
*See page 24 for PIR calculations. 


HYDRO-DAS (hdas) 

08+330:23:59:41.877 12.15836 14.22853 368.9655 4060.69 -1 65.5 65.5 80 57 

Field  Data                                                     Units 
-----  -------------------------------------------------------  -------
 1     RVDAS time tag 
 2     Supply voltage                                           V 
 3     Panel temperature                                        °C 
 4     Fluorometer                                              mV 
 5     Transmissometer                                          mV 
 6     Sea Water Valve (-1 = stern thruster valve, 0 = moon 
       pool valve) 
 7     Flow meter 1 frequency                                   Hz 
 8     Flow meter 2 frequency                                   Hz 
       Flow meter 3 frequency                                   Hz 
 9     Flow meter 4 frequency                                   Hz 
     

GUV DATA (pguv) 

08+330:23:59:40.328 112508 235940 .000197 1.856E-1 1.116E0 4.987E-2 -1.959E-4 
1.637E0 4.153E-3 1.76E0 42.296 17.844 

Field  Data                                                     Units 
-----  -------------------------------------------------------  ------------
 1     RVDAS time tag 
 2     Date                                                     mmddyy 
 3     Time (UTC)                                               hhmmss 
 4     Ed0Gnd                                                   V 
 5     Ed0320                                                   uW (cm^2 nm) 
 6     Ed0340                                                   uW (cm^2 nm) 
 7     Ed0313                                                   uW (cm^2 nm) 
 8     Ed0305                                                   uW (cm^2 nm) 
 9     Ed0380                                                   uW (cm^2 nm) 
10     Ed0PAR                                                   uE (cm^2 nm) 
11     Ed0395                                                   uW (cm^2 nm) 
12     Ed0Temp                                                  °C 
13     Ed0Vin                                                   V 





Remote Temperature (rtmp) 

07+272:00:00:15.960 -1.7870 

Field  Data                                                     Units 
-----  -------------------------------------------------------  ------------
 1     RVDAS time tag 
 2     Temperature at seawater intake                           °C 


OXYGEN DATA (oxyg) 

Internal reference salinity is set to 34 ppt. For further information on this 
data, contact Sharon Stammerjohn, sstammer@ucsc.edu. 

11+011:00:21:48.109 MEASUREMENT     3835   1424    
     Oxygen:  334.01          Saturation: 90.71          Temperature: -0.78 
     DPhase:   37.65          BPhase:     35.95          RPhase:       0.00 
     BAmp:    212.13          BPot:       30.00          RAmp:         0.00
     RawTem.: 788.05

Field  Data                                                     Units 
-----  -------------------------------------------------------  ------------
 1     RVDAS time tag 
2-4    Measurement ID, Model Number, Serial Number              alphanumeric 
 5     Oxygen heading                                           text 
 6     Oxygen Reading                                           µM 
 7     Saturation heading                                       text 
 8     Saturation Reading                                       % 
 9     Temperature heading                                      text 
10     Water Temperature                                        °C 
11     Dphase heading                                           text 
12     Dphase Raw                                               numeric 
13     Rphase heading                                           Text 
14     Rphase Raw                                               numeric 
15     Bamp heading                                             Text 
16     Bamp Raw                                                 numeric 
17     Bpot heading                                             Text 
18     Bpot Raw                                                 numeric 
19     Ramp heading                                             Text 
20     Ramp Raw                                                 numeric 
21     RawTem heading                                           Text 
22     RawTemp                                                  V 


WINCH DATA (bwnc, twnc, cwnc) 

13+157:04:20:20.976 ^^^A03RD,2013-06-06T04:20:29.352,BALTIC,00000236,00000.0,-
00009.3,3306 

Field  Data                                                     Units 
-----  -------------------------------------------------------  ------------ 
 1     RVDAS time tag                                           alphanumeric 
 2     LAN ID                                                   alphanumeric 
 3     LCI-90i Date and Time                                    alphanumeric 
 4     Winch Name                                               alphanumeric 
 5     Tension                                                  lbs 
 6     Speed                                                    m/min 
 7     Pay-out                                                  m 
 8     Checksum                                                 numeric 


NAVIGATIONAL DATA /rvdas/nav 

Seapath GPS (seap) 

The Seapath GPS outputs the following data strings, four in NMEA format and two 
in proprietary PSXN format: 

   • GPZDA 
   • GPGGA 
   • GPVTG 
   • GPHDT 
   • PSXN, 20 
   • PSXN, 22 
   • PSXN, 23 


GPZDA 

02+253:00:00:00.772 $GPZDA,235947.70,09,09,2002,,*7F 

Field  Data                                                     Units 
-----  -------------------------------------------------------  ------------ 
 1     RVDAS time tag 
 2     $GPZDA 
 3     time                                                     hhmmss.ss 
 4     Day                                                      dd 
 5     Month                                                    mm 
 6     Year                                                     yyyy 
 7     (empty field) 
 8     Checksum 


GPGGA 

02+253:00:00:00.938 
GPGGA,235947.70,6629.239059,S,06827.668899,W,1,07,1.0,11.81,M,,M,,*6F 

Field  Data                                                     Units 
-----  -------------------------------------------------------  ------------
 1     RVDAS time tag 
 2     $GPGGA 
 3     time                                                     hhmmss.ss 
 4     Latitude                                                 ddmm.mmmmmm 
 5     N or S for north or south latitude 
 6     Longitude ddmm.mmmmmm 
 7     E or W for east or west longitude 
 8     GPS quality indicator, 0=invalid, 1=GPS SPS, 2=DGPS, 
       3=PPS, 4=RTK, 5=float RTK, 6=dead reckoning 
 9     number of satellites in use (00-99) 
10     HDOP x.x 
 9     height above ellipsoid in meters m.mm 
11     M 
12     (empty field) 
13     M 
14     age of DGPS corrections in seconds s.s 
15     DGPS reference station ID (0000-1023) 
16     Checksum 


GPVTG 

02+253:00:00:00.940 $INVTG,19.96,T,,M,4.9,N,,K,A*39 

Field  Data                                                     Units 
-----  -------------------------------------------------------  ------------ 
 1     RVDAS time tag 
 2     $GPVTG 
 3     course over ground, degrees true                         d.dd 
 4     T 
 5     , 
 6     M 
 7     speed over ground in knots                               k.k 
 8     N 
 9     , 
10     K 
11     Mode 
12     Checksum 


GPHDT 

02+253:00:00:00.941 $GPHDT,20.62,T*23 

Field  Data                                                     Units 
-----  -------------------------------------------------------  ------------ 
 1     RVDAS time tag 
 2     $GPHDT 
 3     Heading, degrees true                                    d.dd 
 4     T 
 5     Checksum 


PSXN,20 

02+253:00:00:00.942 $PSXN,20,0.43,0.43*39 

Field  Data                                                     Units 
-----  -------------------------------------------------------  ------------ 
 1     RVDAS time tag 
 2     $PSXN 
 3     20 
 4     Horizontal position & velocity quality: 0=normal, 
       1=reduced performance, 2=invalid data 
 5     Height & vertical velocity quality: 0=normal, 1=reduced 
       performance, 2=invalid data 
 6     Heading quality: 0=normal, 1=reduced performance, 
       2=invalid data 
 7     Roll & pitch quality: 0=normal, 1=reduced performance, 
       2=invalid data 
 8     Checksum 


PSXN,22 

02+253:00:00:00.942 $PSXN,22,0.43,0.43*39 

Field  Data                                                     Units 
-----  -------------------------------------------------------  ------------  
 1     RVDAS time tag 
 2     $PSXN 
 3     22 
 4     gyro calibration value since system start-up in degrees  d.dd 
 5     short term gyro offset in degrees                        d.dd 
 6     Checksum 


PSXN,23 

02+253:00:00:02.933 $PSXN,23,0.47,0.57,20.62,0.03*0C 

Field  Data                                                     Units 
-----  -------------------------------------------------------  ------------ 
1 RVDAS time tag 
2 $PSXN 
3 23 
4 roll in degrees, positive with port side up                   d.dd 
5 pitch in degrees, positive with bow up                        d.dd 
6 Heading, degrees true                                         d.dd 
7 heave in meters, positive down m.mm 
8 Checksum 



TRIMBLE (P-CODE) GPS (PCOD) 

The Trimble GPS, which formerly output Precise Position (P-Code) strings, but 
now only outputs Standard Position (Civilian) strings, outputs three NMEA 
standard data strings: 

• Position fix (GGA) 
• Latitude / longitude (GLL), 
• Track and ground speed (VTG) 


GGA: GPS Position Fix - Geoid/Ellipsoid 

01+319:00:04:11.193 $GPGGA,000410.312,6227.8068,S,06043.6738,W,1,06,1.0, 
031.9,M,-017.4,M,,*49 

Field  Data                                                     Units 
-----  -------------------------------------------------------  ------------  
 1     RVDAS Time tag                                           
 2     $GPGGA 
 3     UTC time at position                                     hhmmss.sss 
 4     Latitude                                                 ddmm.mmm 
 5     North (N) or South (S) 
 6     Longitude                                                ddmm.mmm 
 7     East (E) or West (W) 
 8     GPS quality: 
        0 = Fix not available or invalid 
        1 = GPS, SPS mode, fix valid 
        2 = DGPS (differential GPS), SPS mode, fix valid 
        3 = P-CODE PPS mode, fix valid 
 9     Number of GPS satellites used 
10     HDOP (horizontal dilution of precision) 
11     Antenna height                                           meters 
12     M for meters 
13     Geoidal height                                           meters 
14     M for meters 
15     Age of differential GPS data (no data in the sample 
       string) 
16     Differential reference station ID (no data in the 
       sample string) 
17     Checksum (no delimiter before this field) 


GLL: GPS Latitude/Longitude 

01+319:00:04:11.272 $GPGLL,6227.8068,S,06043.6738,W,000410.312,A*32 

Field  Data                                                     Units 
-----  -------------------------------------------------------  ------------
 1     RVDAS Time tag 
 2     $GPGLL 
 3     Latitude                                                 degrees 
 4     North or South 
 5     Longitude                                                degrees 
 6     East or West 
 7     UTC of position                                          hhmmss.sss 
 8     Status of data (A = valid) 
 9     Checksum 


VTG: GPS TRACK AND GROUND SPEED 

01+319:00:04:11.273 $GPVTG,138.8,T,126.0,M,000.0,N,000.0,K*49 

Field  Data                                                     Units 
-----  -------------------------------------------------------  ------------ 
 1     RVDAS time tag 
 2     $GPVTG 
 3     Heading                                                  degrees 
 4     Degrees true (T) 
 5     Heading                                                  degrees 
 6     Degrees magnetic (M)                                     
 7     Ship speed                                               knots 
 8     N = knots 
 9     Speed                                                    km/hr 
10     K = km per hour 
11     Checksum 


GYRO COMPASS (gyr1) 

00+019:23:59:59.952 $HEHDT 25034,-020*73 

Field  Data                                                     Units 
-----  -------------------------------------------------------  ------------ 
 1     RVDAS time tag 
 2     $HEHDT 
 3     Heading, Degrees True                                    degrees 
 4     Checksum 
 5     


ADCP COURSE (adcp) 

00+019:23:59:59.099 $PUHAW,UVH,-1.48,-0.51,250.6 

Field  Data                                                     Units 
-----  -------------------------------------------------------  ------------  
 1     RVDAS time tag 
 2     $PUHAW 
 3     UVH (E-W, N-S, Heading) 
 4     Ship Speed relative to reference layer, east vector      knots 
 5     Ship Speed relative to reference layer, north vector     knots 
 6     Ship heading                                             degrees 


PROCESSED DATA /process/ 

pCO2-merged 

00+346:23:58:20.672 2000346.9991 2398.4 1008.4 0.01 45.4 350.3 342.6 15.77 Equil 
43.6826 173.1997 15.51 33.90 0.33 5.28 9.05 1007.57 40.0 14.87 182.44 -1 

Field  Data                                                     Units 
-----  -------------------------------------------------------  ------------ 
 1     RVDAS time tag 
 2     pCO2 time tag (decimal is fractional time of day)        yyyyddd.ttt 
 3     Raw voltage (IR)                                         mV 
 4     Cell temperature                                         °C 
 5     Barometer                                                MBar 
 6     Flow rate                                                ml/min 
 7     Concentration                                            ppm 
 8     pCO2 pressure                                            microAtm 
 9     Equilibrated temperature                                 °C 
10     Sea Water Temp                                           1 or 2 digits 
11     Valve position                                           °C 
12     Flow source (Equil = pCO2 measurement)                   text 
13     RVDAS latitude                                           degrees 
14     RVDAS longitude                                          degrees 
15     TSG external temperature                                 °C 
16     TSG 1 salinity                                           PSU 
17     Fluorometer                                              V 
18     RVDAS true wind speed                                    m/s 
19     RVDAS true wind direction                                degrees 
20     Barometric Pressure                                      mBars 
21     Uncontaminated seawater pump flow rate                   l/min 
22     Speed over ground                                        knots 
23     Course made good                                         degrees 
24     Oxygen                                                   µM 
25     TSG 2 internal temperature                               °C 
26     TSG 2 salinity                                           PSU 
27     TSG 1 internal temperature                               °C 
                                                                -1 stern
28     H2O Input Source                                         thruster 
                                                                0 moonpool 



Calculations 

The file instrument.coeff located in the / directory contains the calibration 
factors for shipboard instruments. This was the file used by the RVDAS 
processing software. 

PAR 

    Coefficients parc1 and parcv for this cruise can be found in the 
    instrument.coeff file as the variable labeled PAR, respectively. Variable 
    par is the raw data in mV, as described in the "mwx1" file description. The 
    calibration scale and probe offset dark are values taken from the PAR Cal 
    Sheet. 

    par = raw data mV 
    calibration scale = 5.8644 V/(•Einstiens/cm2sec) 
    parc1 = 1 / scale = .17 
    probe offset dark = -.1 mV 
    parcv = dark x 1000 mV/V = -0.0001 V 
    ((par / 1000 mV/V) - parcv) x parc1 x 10000 cm2/m2 = •Einstiens/m2sec 

    Calculations (extracted from the C code): 
    /* Convert from mV to V */ 
    par /= 1000; 
    /* (par V -vdark V) / Calibration Scale Factor V/uE/cm2sec */ 
    parCalc = (par -parcv) * parc1 * 10000; 


PSP 

    Coefficient pspCoeff for this cruise can be found in the instrument.coeff 
    file as the variable labeled PSP1. Variable psp is the raw data in mV, as 
    described in the "mwx1" file description. 

    psp = raw data mV 
    calibration scale = pspCoeff x 10^-6 V/(W/m2) 
    psp / (scale x 1000 mV/V) = W/m2 

    Calculations (extracted from the C code): 
         /* Convert from mV to W/m^2 */ 
         pspCalc = (psp * 1000 / pspCoeff); 


PIR 

    Coefficient pirCoeff for this cruise can be found in the instrument.coeff 
    file as the variable labeled PIR1. Variable pir_thermo is the raw data in 
    mV, pir_case is the PIR case temperature in Kelvins and pir_dome is the PIR 
    dome temperature in Kelvins, as described in the "mwx1" file description. 
    Hard-coded "C" coefficients are shown below: 

    Dome constant = 3.5 
    Sigma = 5.6704e-8 

    pir_thermo = raw data mV 
    calibration scale = pirCoeff x 10^-6 V/(W/m2) 
    pir_thermo / (scale x 1000 mV/V) = W/m2 


    Calculations (extracted from the C code): 
         /* convert mV to W/m^2 */ 
         pirCalc = (pir_thermo * 1000 / pirCoeff) 
         /* correct for case temperature */ 
         pirCalc += sigma * pow(pir_case,4) 
         /* correct for dome temperature */ 
         pirCalc -= 3.5 * sigma * (pow(pir_dome, 4) -pow(pir_case, 4)) 



Antarctic Support Contract 25 United States Antarctic Program 



Data Report NBP1403 


20.4.  ACQUISITION PROBLEMS AND EVENTS 

This section lists problems with acquisition noted during this cruise including 
instrument failures, data acquisition system failures and any other factor 
affecting this data set. The format is ddd:hh:mm (ddd is year-day, hh is hour, 
and mm is minute). Times are reported in UTC. 

Start      End        Description 
---------  ---------  ------------------------------------------------
079.10.18             Start data collection 
           080.08.15  Exit Australian EEZ 45 14.3 Lat 151 20.07 lon 
082.03.49             Enter Australian EEZ 50 51.08 Lat 157 37.76 lon 
           083.14.59  Exit Australian EEZ 55 30.63 Lat 164 36.02 Lon 
118.09.42             Enter Tahitian EEZ 26 42.42 Lat 150 00.014 Lon 
           124.16.00  Stop Data collection 



































Antarctic Support Contract 26 United States Antarctic Program 



Data Report NBP1403 


20.5.  Appendix: Sensors and Calibrations 

Sensor                       Serial         Last Cal.   Comments 
                             Number 
---------------------------  -------------  ----------  --------------------
Meteorology & Radiometers 
Stbd Anemometer (Gill US)    847014          9/29/2010  Installed 11/17/2010 
Port Anemometer (Gill US)    924057         11/18/09    Installed  3/5/2010 
Barometer                    BP00872        11/29/2012  Installed  1/28/2014 
Humidity/Wet Temp            06135          11/29/2012  Installed  9/11/2013 
PIR                          32845F3         7/17/2013  Installed  1/28/2014 
PSP                          32850F3         8/15/2013  Installed  1/28/2014 
Mast PAR                     6357           12/27/2012  Installed  9/11/2013 
GUV (Mast)                   25110203114    12/18/2012  Installed  9/11/2013 
Underway 
Micro-TSG #1 (until 3/4/13)  4546167-0242   12/29/2012  Installed  5/9/2013 
Micro-TSG #2                 4566350-0389   10/20/2011  Installed  9/7/2012 
Digital Remote Temp          3849120-0178    9/21/2012  Installed  5/9/2013 
Oxygen Optode                3835-1424      10/21/2010  Installed 12/30/2010 
Fluorometer                  AFL-016D        8/22/2012  Installed  9/11/2013 
Transmissometer              CST-557DR       8/28/2013  Installed  1/28/2014 
CTD 
CTD Fish                     91480          12/18/2012  Installed  1/28/2014 
CTD Fish Pressure            53952          12/18/2012  Installed  1/28/2014 
CTD Deck Unit                11P19858-0768   N/A        Installed  1/28/2014 
Slip-Ring Assembly           1.406           N/A        Installed  1/28/2014 
Carousel Water Sampler       3214153-0140    N/A        Installed  1/28/2014 
Pump (primary)               051627 3.0K    12/23/2012  Installed  1/28/2014 
Pump (secondary)             051626 3.0K    12/23/2012  Installed  1/28/2014 
Temperature (primary)        03P2308         6/28/2013  Installed  1/28/2014 
Temperature (secondary)      03P2299         6/12/2013  Installed  1/28/2014 
Conductivity (primary)       042513          2/26/2013  Installed  1/28/2014 
Conductivity (secondary)     041798          6/21/2013  Installed  1/28/2014 
Dissolved Oxygen (primary)   430161          6/12/2013  Installed  1/28/2014 
Dissolved Oxygen (primary)   430080          2/13/2013  Installed  1/28/2014 
Fluorometer                  AFLD-0011       7/17/2013  Installed  1/28/2014 
Transmissometer              CST-0889        9/5/13     Installed  1/28/2014 
Altimeter                    49432           N/A        Installed  1/28/2014 

Antarctic Support Contract 27 United States Antarctic Program 




















































Mast Barometer

R.M. Young Company
2801 Aero Park Drive
Traverse City. Michigan 49686 USA

                          CALIBRATION REPORT
                         Barometric Pressure

           Customer:      Lockheed Martin Maritime Systems & Sensors
Test Number: 2060-O1B                  Customer PO: 4900027957
  Test Date: 29 November 2012           Sales Order: 2973

                              Test Sensor
              Model: 61201              Serial Number: BP00872
Description: Barometric Pressure Sensor


Report of calibration comparison of test barometric pressure sensor 
with National Institute of Standards and Technology traceable standard 
pressure calibrator at five pressures in the RM. Young Company 
controlled pressure facility. Calibration accuracy ± 1.0 hPa.


             Reference        Voltage         Indicated (1)
             Pressure          Output           Pressure
             (hPa)          (millivolts)          (hPa)
             ---------      ------------      -------------
             800.0              -1                800.0
             875.0             1251               875.0
             950.0             2501               950.0
             1025.0            3749              1024.9
             1100.0            4996              1099.7

             (1) Calculated from voltage output


All reference equipment used in this calibration procedure have been 
tested by comparison to traceable standards certified by the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology.

Reference Instrument                    Serial #   NIST Test Reference
--------------------------------------  --------   -------------------
Druck Pressure Controller Model DPI515  51500497     	UKAS Lab 0221
Fluke Multimeter Model 8060A            4865407         234027


                       METEOROLOGICAL INSTRUMENTS
    Tel: 231-946-3980  Fax: 231-946-4772  Email: met.sales@youngusa.com
                         Website: yoangusa.com
                        ISO 9001:2008 CERTIFIED




Mast Humidity Sensor

R.M. Young Company
2801 Aero Park Drive
Traverse City. Michigan 49686 USA

                          CALIBRATION REPORT
                         Barometric Humidity

        Customer:      Lockheed Martin Maritime Systems & Sensors

	        Test Number 2944-02R               Customer PO 4900027957
        Test Date: 29 November 2012             Sales Order: 2973

                              Test Sensor
	        Model: 41372LC                     Serial Number: TS06135
            Description: Temperature/Relative Humidity Sensor


Report of calibration comparison of test relative Humidity sensor with 
National Institute of Standards and Thechnology traceable standard relative 
humidity sensor at five humidity levels in the R.M Young Cunpany controlled 
humidity chamber facility. Calibration accuracy ± 2.0%.


             Reference         Current        Indicated (1)
             Humidity          Output           Humidity
                (%)         (milligrams)           (%)
             ---------      ------------      -------------
             10.0                5.9              12.1
             30.0                9.0              31.2
             50.0               12.4              52.3
             69.9               15.4              71.0
             89.9               18.1              88.1

             (1) Calculated from voltage output

All reference equipment used in this calibration procedure have been 
tested by comparison to traceable standards certified by the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology.

Reference Instrument                   Serial #    NIST Test Reference
----------------------------------     --------    -------------------
Vaisala Humidity Sensor Model 35AC     N475040         TN 266162
Fluke Multimeter Model 8060A           4865407           234027


                       METEOROLOGICAL INSTRUMENTS
    Tel: 231-946-3980  Fax: 231-946-4772  Email: met.sales@youngusa.com
                         Website: yoangusa.com
                        ISO 9001:2008 CERTIFIED




Mast Temperature Sensor

R.M. Young Company
2801 Aero Park Drive
Traverse City. Michigan 49686 USA

                          CALIBRATION REPORT
                             Temperature

        Customer:      Lockheed Martin Maritime Systems & Sensors

	        Test Number 2944-02T               Customer PO 4900027957
        Test Date: 29 November 2012             Sales Order: 2973

                              Test Sensor
	        Model: 41372LC                     Serial Number: TS06135
            Description: Temperature/Relative Humidity Sensor


Report of calibration comparison of test temperature sensor with National 
Institute of Standards and Thechnology traceable standard thermometers at 
three temperatures in the R.M Young Cunpany controlled temperature 
calibration bath facilities. Calibration accuracy ± 0.1° Celsius.


                Bath            Current         Indicated (1)
             Temperature        Output           Temperature
             (degrees C)      (milligrams)       (degrees C)
             -----------      ------------      -------------
             -49.86               4.023            -49.55
               0.03              12.008              0.05
              50.18              20.029             50.18

             (1) Calculated from voltage output

All reference equipment used in this calibration procedure have been 
tested by comparison to traceable standards certified by the National 
Institute of Standards and Technology.

Reference Instrument                    Serial #   NIST Test Reference
--------------------------------------  --------   -------------------
Brooklyn Thermometer Model 43-FC        8006-118        204365
Brooklyn Thermometer Model 22332-D5-FC   25071         249763
Brooklyn Thermometer Model 2X400-D7-FC   77532         228060
Kethley Muitirrietsr rtlecic1191         15232         234027


                       METEOROLOGICAL INSTRUMENTS
    Tel: 231-946-3980  Fax: 231-946-4772  Email: met.sales@youngusa.com
                         Website: yoangusa.com
                        ISO 9001:2008 CERTIFIED




Mast PIR


                        THE EPPLEY LABORATORY, INC.
     12 Sheffield Avenue, PO Box 419, Newport, Rhode Island USA 02840
     Phone: 401.847.1020  Fax: 401.847.1031  Email: info@eppleylab.com


                             STANDARDIZATION OF
                    EPPLEY PRECISION INFRARED RADIOMETER
                                 Model PIR

                           Serial Number: 32845F3

                         Resistance: 712 Ω at 23°C
               Temperature Compensation Range: -20° to +40°C


This pyrgeometer has been compared against Eppley's Blackbody Calibration 
System under radiation intensities of approximately 200 watts meter(^-2) 
and an average ambient temperature of 30°C as measured by Standard Omega 
Temperature Probe, RTD#1.

As a result of a series of comparisons, it has been found to have a 
sensitivity of:

                    4.08 x l0(^-6) volts/watts meter(^-2)


The calculation of this constant is based on the fact that the relationship 
between radiation intensity and emf is rectilinear to intensities of 700 
watts meter 2. This radiometer is linear to within ±1.0% up to this 
intensity.

The calibration of this instrument is traceable to the International 
Practical Temperature Scale (IPTS) through a precision low-temperature 
blackbody.

Eppley recommends a minimum calibration cycle of five (5) years but 
encourages annual calibrations for highest measurement accuracy. Unless 
otherwise stated in the remarks section below or on the Sales Order, the 
results are "AS FOUND / AS LEFT".


Shipped to: LMP4 ISGS N.S.F.                  Date of Test: July 17, 2013
Port Hueneme, CA

S.O. Number: 63850
Date: July 18, 2013






Mast PSP


                        THE EPPLEY LABORATORY, INC.
     12 Sheffield Avenue, PO Box 419, Newport, Rhode Island USA 02840
     Phone: 401.847.1020  Fax: 401.847.1031  Email: info@eppleylab.com




Calibration Certificate



Instrument:          Precision Spectral Pyranometer, Model PSP, Serial Number 
                     32850F3

Procedure:           This pyranometer was compared in Eppley's Integrating 
                     Hemisphere according to procedures described in ISO 9847 
                     Section 5.3.1 and Technical Procedure, TPO1 of The Eppley 
                     Laboratory, Inc.'s Quality Assurance Manual on Calibrations.

Transfer Standard:   Eppley Precision Spectral Pyranometer, Model PSP, Serial 
                     Number 21231 F3

Results:             Sensitivity:  	S = 7.68 µV / WM(^-2)
                     Uncertainty:  U95 = ±0.91% (95% confidence level, k-2)
                     Resistance:   706 Ω at 23°C

                     Date of Test: August 7, 2013

Traceability:        This calibration is traceable to the World Radiation 
                     Reference (WRR) through comparisons with Eppley's AHF 
                     standard self-calibrating cavity pyrheliometers
                     which participated in the Eleventh International 
                     Pyrheliometric Comparisons (IPCXI) at Davos, Switzerland 
                     in September-October 2010. Unless otherwise stated in
                     the remarks section below or on the Sales Order, the 
                     results of this calibration are "AS FOUND / AS LEFT".

Due Date:            Eppley recommends a minimum calibration cycle of five 
                     (5) years but encourages annual calibrations for highest 
                     measurement accuracy.

Customer:            LMP4 ISGS
                     Port Hueneme, CA

Eppley SO            63884

Date of Certificate: August 15, 2013





Mast PAR

                       Biospherical Instruments Inc.

                          Calibration Certificate

      Calibraton Date                 12/27/2012
      Model Number                    QSR-240
      Serial Number                   6357
      Operator                        TPC
      Standard Lamp                   V-C3l(3/7/12)
      Probe Fxcilation Votage Range:  6 to 18 VDC(+)
      Output Polarity:                Positive


      Probe Conditions at Calibration (in air):

           Calibration Voltage      6     VDC(+)
           Probe Current:           7.2   mA

      Probe Output Voltage

           Probe Illuminated       98.3   mV
           Probe Dark               1.0   mv
           Probe Net Response      97.3   mv
           RG78O                    1.0   mv

       Corrected lamp Output:

           Output In Air (same condition as calibration):

                   1.044E+16   quanta/cm(^2)sec
                   0.01733     uE/cm(^2)sec

       Calibration Scale Factor:
       (To calculate irradiance, divide the net voltage reading in Volts by 
       this value.)

           Dry:    9.3240E-18  V/(quanta/cm(^2)sec)
                   5.6149E+00  V/(uE/cm(^2)sec)


       Notes:

       1. Annual calibration is recommended.
       2. Calibration is performed using a Standard of Spectral Irradiance 
          traceable to the National Institute of Standards and Technology 
          (NIST).
       3. The collector should be cleaned frequently with alcohol.
       4. Calibration was performed with customer cable, when available.


QSR240R  05/24/96



Mast GUV


                        Biospherical Instruments Inc.

                       System Calibration Certificate

  TIM INSTRUMENTS REFERENCED BELOW WERE FACTORY TESTED AND CALIBRATED BY

                        BIOSPHERICAL INSTRUMENTS INC.
                              5340 Riley Street
                      San Diego, California 92110 USA

Instruments: GUV-2511 No 25110203114

Optical Calibrations:

NIST Traceability. For wavelengths longer than 313 em the specific instru-
     ments cited here were calibrated using a 1000W FEL #V-031(3/712) 
     following procedures and standards traceable to NIST Standard of 
     Spectral Irradiance F616. Traceability paths and all procedures for 
     all calibrated lamps and associated apparatus (shunts. power supplies. 
     DMMs. etc) are maintained following calibration methodologies per 
     National Bureau of Standards (US) (NBS) Special Publication 250-20 
     Spectral Irradiance Calibrations (1987) and NBS Publication 594-13 
     Optical Radiation Measurements: The 1973 Scale of Spectral Irradiance 
     (1977).

Solar Calibrations. Lamp calibrations are problematic for solar UV 
     measurements (wavelengths below 320 nm) because the solar spectrum is 
     radically different from the lamp spectrum and changes greatly as a 
     function of wavelength. Solar calibrations are achieved through direct 
     comparison with measurements of a high resolution scanning 
     spectroradiometer in San Diego (SUV-100), which is part of the 
     National Science Foundation's UV Monitoring Network. The SUV-100 
     instrument has a bandwidth of 1 nm.  Calibrated filter radiometer data 
     therefore report spectral Irradiance at the channel's nominal 
     wavelengths with a bandwidth of 1 nm.  Solar calibrations are 
     typically accurate to within ±10% for solar zenith angles smaller than 
     75%. At larger solar zenith angles, UV channels have a greater 
     uncertainty due to the rapid change of the solar UV spectrum.

          Note that this certificate contains a subset of the information 
          delivered in the calibration database 25110203114v7.mdb. This 
          database is required for operation of this system using 
          Biospherical Instrument Inc.'s Logger® software.


                        Biospherical Instruments Inc.

                      GUV-2511 Calibration Certificate
                      (See PDF version of this report)



Underway Oxygen Sensor


AANDERAA DATA INSTRUMENTS                     CALIBRATION CERTIFICATE
                                         Form No. 622, Dec 2005
                                                          Page 1 of 2

Sensing Foil Batch No: 5009      Product: Oxygen Optode 3835
Certificate No:                  Serial No. 1424
                                 Calibration Date: 21 October 2010

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

This is to certify that this product has been calibrated using the 
following instruments:

Calibration Bath model FNT               321-1-40
ASL Digital Thermometer model F250       Serial: 6792/06


  Parameter: Internal Temperature:

Calibration points and readings:
Temperature (°C)      1.17        12.12         24.11          36.08
Reading (mV)        730.09       383.95        -11.29         -379.10

Giving these coefficients
Index                  0            1             2              3
TempCoef          2.37613E01   -3.08128E-02   2.84735E-06   -4.15311E-09


  Parameter: Oxygen:

                      O2 Concentration                   Air Saturation
Range:                0-500 µM  (1)                          0-120%
Accuracy:             <±8µM or ±5% (whichever is greater)    ±5%
Resolution:           <1 µM                                  <0.4%
Settling Time (63%):  <25 seconds 


Calibration points and readings (2)::
                           Air Saturated Water    Zero Solution (Na2SO3)
Phase reading              3.77669E+01            6.65595E+01
Temperature reading Ct)    9.90918E+00            2.04774E+01
Air Pressure (IsPa)        9.76884E+02

Giving these coefficients
Index                  0            1             2              3
PhaseCoef        -4.44928E00    1.17131E00    0.00000E00      0.00000M

(1) Valid for 0 to 2000m (6562ft) depth. salinity 33 - 37ppt
(2) The calibration is performed in fresh water and the salinity setting 
    is set to: 0


AANDERAA DATA INSTRUMENTS  CALIBRATION CERTIFICATE



Sensing Foil Batch No: 5000      Product: Oxygen Optode 3835
Certificate No:                  Serial No. 1424
                                 Calibration Date: 21 October 2010

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

SR10 Scaling Coefficients:


At the SR10 output the Oxygen Optode 3830 can give either absolute oxygen 
concentration in µM or air saturation in %. The setting of the internal 
property "Output" (3), controls the section of the unit. The coefficients 
for converting SR10 raw data to engineering units are fixed

Output = =1                          Output = -2
A = 0                                A = 0
B = 4.883E-0l                        B = 1.465E-01
C = 0                                C = 0
D = 0                                D = 0
Oxygen (µM) = A + BN + CN2 + DN3     Oxygen (%)= A + BN + CN2 + DN3

(3) The default output setting is set to -1








Date: 22 October 2010


















AANDERAA DATA INSTRUMENTS  CALIBRATION CERTIFICATE



Certificate No. 3853_5009_40331    	Product: 02 Sensing Foil PSt3 3953
Batch No: 5009                     Calibration Date: 2 June 2010

Calibration points and phase readings (degrees)
--------------------------------------------------------------
Temperature       (°C)    3.97   10.93   20.15   29.32   38.39
----------------------  ------  ------  ------  ------  ------
Pressure (hPa)          977.00  977.00  977.00  977.00  917.00
                  0.00   73.18   72.63   71.62   70.72   69.77
                  1.00   68.01   67.02   65.42   63.92   62.31
                  2.00   64.39   63.16   61.20   59.44   57.57
O2 in %           5.00   55.80   54.16   51.76   49.56   47.45
of 02+N2         10.00   46.27   44.47   41.97   39.75   37.69
                 20.90   35.09   33.38   31.14   29.24   27.56
                 30.00   29.85   28.30   26.31   24.64   23.19



Giving these coefficients (1)

Index                 0             1             2             3
--------------  ------------  ------------  ------------  -------------
C0 Coefficient   4.53793E+03  -1.62595E+02   3.29574E+00   -2.79285E-02
C1 Coefficient  -2.50953E+02   8.02322E+00  -1.58398E-01    1.31141E-03
C2 Coefficient   5.66417E+00  -1.59647E-0I   3.07910E-03   -2.46265E-05
C3 Coefficient  -5.99449E-02   1.48326E-03  -2.82110E-05    2.15156E-07
C4 Coefficient   2.43614E-04  -5.26759E-06   1.00064E-07   -7.14320E-10

(1) Ask for Form No 621S when this 02 Sensing Foil is used in Oxygen Sensor 
    3830 with Serial Numbers lower than 184.
















Date: 11/4/2010



Underway Micro-TSG number 1





                           Sea-Bird Electronics, Inc.

                13431 NE 20th Street, Bellevue, WA 98005-2010 USA

    Phone: (+1) 425-643-9866 Fax (+1) 425-643-9954 Email: seabird@seabird.com


SENSOR SERIAL NUMBER 0242     SBE 45 CONDUCTIVITY CALIBRATION DATA
CALIBRATION DATE: 29-Dec-12   PSS 1978: C(35,15,0) = 4.2914 Siemens/meter

COEFFICIENTS:
g = -9.992296e-001            CPcor = -9.5700e-008
h =  1.524743e-OO1            CTcor =  3.2500e-006
i = -4.722991e-004            WBOTC = -0.0000e+000
j =  6.065458e-005 

      BATH TEMP  BATH SAL   BATH COND   INST FREQ   INST COND     RESIDUAL
       (ITS-90)   (PSU)    (Siemens/m)    (Hz)     (Siemens/m)  (Siemens/m) 
      ---------  --------  -----------  ---------  -----------  -----------
       22.0000    0.0000     0.00000     2566.82     0.00000      0.00000
        1.0000   34.8118     2.97562     5119.70     2.97561     -0.00001
        4.5000   34.7917     3.28263     5313.24     3.28264      0.00001
       15.0000   34.7487     4.26420     5888.60     4.26420      0.00000
       18.5000   34.7394     4.60927     6077.64     4.60927      0.00001
       24.0000   34.7293     5.16711     6371.04     5.16711     -0.00001
       29.0000   34.7238     5.68887     6633.34     5.68886     -0.00001
       32.5000   34.7207     6.06120     6814.13     6.06121      0.00001

f = INST FREQ * sqrt(1.0 = WBOTC * t) / 1000.0

                      2    3    4 
Conductivity = (g + hf + if + jf ) / (1 + δt + εp) Siemens/meter 

t = temperature [°C];  p = pressure [decibars];  δ = Ctcor;  ε = cPcor;

residual = instrument conductivity - bath conductivity


                                                              Date, Slope Correction

                                                              31-Aug-10 0.9996548
                                                              29-0ec-12 1.0000000







                           Sea-Bird Electronics, Inc.

                13431 NE 20th Street, Bellevue, WA 98005-2010 USA

    Phone: (+1) 425-643-9866 Fax (+1) 425-643-9954 Email: seabird@seabird.com


SENSOR SERIAL NUMBER 0242     SBE 45 TEMPERATURE CALIBRATION DATA
CALIBRATION DATE: 29-Dec-12   ITS-90 TEMPERATURE SCALE

ITS-90 COEFFICIENTS
a0 =  4.555848e-005
a1 =  2.733778e-004
a2 = -2.324224e-006
a3 =  1.499077e-007

                      BATH TEMP  INSTRUMENT  INST TEMP   RESIDUAL
                      (ITS-90)     OUTPUT    (ITS-90)    (ITS-90)
                      ---------  ----------  ---------  ---------
                       1.0000     649816.0     1.0000     0.0000
                       4.5000     554883.5     4.5000    -0.0000
                      15.0000     352327.7    15.0000    -0.0000
                      18.5000     304717.7    18.5000     0.0000
                      24.0000     244011.0    24.0000     0.0000
                      29.0000     200602.2    29.0000    -0.0000
                      32.5000     175478.8    32.5000     0.0000


                                              2            3
Temperature ITS-90 = 1/{a0 + a1[ln(n)] + a2[ln (n)] + a3[ln (n)]} - 273.15(°C)

residual = instrument temperature - bath temperature


                                                   Date, Delta T (mdeg C)

                                                   31-Aug-10  0.24 
                                                   29-Dec-12  0.00


















Underway Micro-TSG number 2 (see PDF version)























































Underway Digital Remote Temperature







                           Sea-Bird Electronics, Inc.

                13431 NE 20th Street, Bellevue, WA 98005-2010 USA

    Phone: (+1) 425-643-9866 Fax (+1) 425-643-9954 Email: seabird@seabird.com


SENSOR SERIAL NUMBER 0178              SBE 38 TEMPERATURE CALIBRATION DATA
CALIBRATION DATE: 21-Sep-12           ITS-90 TEMPERATURE SCALE

ITS-90 COEFFICIENTS
a0 = -4.740793e-005 
al =  2.820902e-004 
a2 = -2.754939e-006 
a3 =  1.681819e-007

                      BATH TEMP  INSTRUMENT  INST TEMP   RESIDUAL
                      (ITS-90)     OUTPUT    (ITS-90)    (ITS-90)
                      ---------  ----------  ---------  ---------
                      -1.50000    750879.8    -1.49997    0.00003
                       1.00000    611250.6     0.99996   -0.00001
                       1.50000    575382.9     1.49998   -0.00002
                       8.00000    494802.5     7.99999   -0.00001
                      11.50000    426843.9    11.50002    0.00002
                      15.00000    369343.4    15.00002    0.00002
                      18.50000    320537.2    18.49998   -0.00002
                      21.99990    278981.8    21.99999    0.00009
                      25.50000    243494.9    25.49993   -0.00007
                      28.99990    213101.3    28.99982   -0.00008
                      32.49990    186993.9    32.49996    0.00006

                                              2            3
Temperature ITS-90 = 1/{a0 + a1[ln(n)] + a2[ln (n)] + a3[ln (n)]} - 273.15(°C)

residual = instrument temperature - bath temperature



                                                   Date, Delta T (mdeg C)

                                                   31-Aug-10  0.24
                                                   29-Dec-12  0.00





Underway Fluorometer 


PO Box 518                                                     (541) 929-5650
620 Applegate St                   WET Labs                Fax (541) 929-5277
Philomath  OR  07370                                   http://www.wetlabs.com


Chlorophyll Fluorometer Characterization in Uranine liquid Proxy (new method)

Date:     08/22/12
Serial #: AFL-016D)
Tech:     dcm


Dark Counts  0J52 volts
CEV          1.195 volts
SF           25.311
FSV          4.61 volts
linearity:   0.999 R(^2) (0-1.5 volts)
             0.995 R(^2) (0-5.45 volts)

Notes:

Dark Counts: Signal output of the meter in clean water with black tape over 
detector.

CEV is the chlorophyll equivalent voltage. This value is the signal output of 
the fluorometer when using a Uranine dye fluorescent proxy that has been 
determined to be approximately equivalent to 26.4 µg/l or a Thalassiosira 
weissflogii phytoplankton culture.

SF is the scale factor used to derive chlorophyll concentration from the 
signal voltage output of the fluorometer. The scale factor is determined by 
using the following equation:
SF = (26.4) / ((CEV - dark).

FSV is the maximum signal voltage output that the fluorometer is capable of.

chlorophyll concentration expressed in µg/m3 can be derived by using the 
following equation:
(µg/l) = (Vmeasured - dark)*SF

The relationship between fluorescence and chlorophyll-a concentrations in-situ 
is high variable.  The scale factor listed on this document was determined by 
using a mono-culture of phytoplankton (Thalassiosira weissflogii).  The 
population was assumed to be reasonably healthy and the concentration was 
determined by using the absorption method.  To accurately determine 
chlorophyll concentration using a fluorometer you must perform secondary 
measurements on the populations of interest.  This is typically done using 
extraction based measurement techniques on discrete samples.  For additional 
information on determination of chlorophyll concentration see [Standard 
Methods For The Examination Of Water And Wastewater] part 10200 H published 
jointly by: American Public Health Association, American Water Works 
Association and Water Environment Federation.


Underway Transmissometer



PO Box 518                                                     (541) 929-5650
620 Applegate St                   WET Labs                Fax (541) 929-5277
Philomath  OR  07370                                   http://www.wetlabs.com


|
                              C-Star Calibration


Date August 28, 2013   S/N CST-557DR                          Path length 25cm

                              Analog output   Digital output
Vd                              0.009 V            0 counts
Vair                            4.760 V        15596 counts
Vref                            4.700 V        15399 counts

Temperature of calibration water                                  21.2 °C
Ambient temperature during calibration                            21.8 °C




Relationship of transmittance (Tr) to beam attenuation coefficient (c), and path length (x, in meters): Tr = e(^-cx)

To determine beam transmittance: Tr = (V(sig) - V(dark)) / (V(ref) - V(dark))

To determine beam attenuation coefficient: c = -1/x * ln (Tr)


Vd     Meter output with the beam blocked. This is the offset.
Vair   Meter output in air with a clear beam path.
Vref   Meter output with clean water in the path.
Temperature of calibration water: temperature of clean water used to obtain V(ref).
Ambient temperature: meter temperature in air during the calibration.
Vsig   Measured signal output of meter.





                                                 Revision L         6/9/09





CTD Fish and Pressure Sensor




                           Sea-Bird Electronics, Inc.

                13431 NE 20th Street, Bellevue, WA 98005-2010 USA

    Phone: (+1) 425-643-9866 Fax (+1) 425-643-9954 Email: seabird@seabird.com


SENSOR SERIAL NUMBER 1480     SBEplus PRESSURE CALIBRATION DATA
CALIBRATION DATE: 18-Dec-12   10000 psia S/N 53952


DIGIQUARTZ COEFFICIENTS:      ADS90M, ADS90B, SLOPE AND OFFSET:
01 = -5.561704e+004           AD59014 =   1.16300e-002
02 =  4.302402e-001           ADO900 =   -8.63457e+000
03 =  1.582810e-002           Slope =     0.99999
Dl =  4.708200e+000           Offset =   -3.0213 (dbars)
D2 =  0.000000e+000
T1 =  3.029296e+001
T2 = -2.122954e-004
T3 =  4.352450e-006
T4 =  2.626550e+009
T5 =  0.000000e+000

     PRESSURE    INST       INST        INST       CORRECTED INST  RESIDUAL
      (PSIA)   OUTPUT(Hz)  TEMP(C)  OUTPUT (PSIA)   OUTPUT (PSIA)   (PSIA) 
    ---------  ----------  -------  -------------  --------------  --------
       14.547   33019.50    21.4         19.466         15.084       0.537
     2014.689   33609.67    21.7       2018.592       2014.196      -0.493
     4014.621   34182.17    21.9       4018.885       4014.476      -0.145
     6014.640   34746.23    21.9       6019.053       6014.631      -0.009
     8014.742   35299.59    21.9       8019.715       8015.280       0.537
    10014.990   35842.18    22.0      10018.718      10014.268      -0.722
     8014.780   35299.62    22.1       8019.806       8015.370       0.590
     6014.719   34746.31    22.2       6019.301       6014.878       0.159
     4014.689   34182.23    22.2       4019.027       4014.618      -0.070
     2014.710   33606.71    22.3       2018.677       2014.281      -0.429
       14.555   33019.38    22.4         18.981         14.598       0.043

Residual = corrected instrument pressure - reference pressure


                                                           Date, Avg Offset (psia)

                                                           18-Dec-12 -000







CTD Temperature (Primary)



                           Sea-Bird Electronics, Inc.

                13431 NE 20th Street, Bellevue, WA 98005-2010 USA

    Phone: (+1) 425-643-9866 Fax (+1) 425-643-9954 Email: seabird@seabird.com



SENSOR SERIAL NUMBER 2308             SBE 3 TEMPERATURE CALIBRATION DATA
CALIBRATION DATE: 28-Jun-13           ITS-90 TEMPERATURE SCALE

ITS-90 COEFFICIENTS                    IPTS-68 COEFFICIENTS
g =  4.34531719e-003                  a =  3.68121230e-003
h =  6.44991551e-004                  F =  6.02583850e-004
i =  2.35185807e-005                  c =  1.63930551e-005
j =  2.23479362e-006                  d =  2.23636632e-006
f0 = 1000.0                           f0 = 2906.476


                BATH TEMP  INSTRUMENT FREQ  INST TEMP   RESIDUAL
                (ITS-90)         (Hz)       (ITS-90)    (ITS-90)
                ---------  ---------------  ---------  ---------
                -1.5000        2906.476      -1.5000    0.00000
                 1.0000        3073.288       1.0000    0.00001
                 4.5000        3318.316       4.5000   -0.00001
                 8.0000        3577.096       8.0000   -0.00004
                11.5000        3850.006      11.5000    0.00003
                15.0000        4137.394      15.0001    0.00005
                18.5000        4439.604      18.5000   -0.00001
                22.0000        4756.983      22.0000   -0.00003
                25.5000        5089.855      25.5000   -0.00003
                28.9999        5438.527      28.9999    0.00005
                32.5000        5803.307      32.5000   -0.00001
 
 
Temperature ITS-90 = l/{g + h[ln(f0/f)] + i[ln2(f0/f)] +j[ln3(f0/f]]} - 273.15 (°C)

Temperature IPTS-68 = l/{ a + b[ln(f0/f)] + c[ln2(f0/f)] + d[ln3(f0/f)]} -273.15 (°C)

Following the recommendation of JPOTS: T68 is assumed to be 1.00024 * T90 (-2 to 35°C)

Residual = instrument temperature - bath temperature

                                                                  Date, Offset(mdeg C)

                                                                  25-Jul-12  -4.39
                                                                  28-Jun-13   0.00






CTD Temperature (Secondary)




                           Sea-Bird Electronics, Inc.

                13431 NE 20th Street, Bellevue, WA 98005-2010 USA

    Phone: (+1) 425-643-9866 Fax (+1) 425-643-9954 Email: seabird@seabird.com


SENSOR SERIAL NUMBER: 2299            SBE3 TEMPERATURE CALIBRATION DATA
CALIBRATION DATE: 12-Jun-13           ITS-90 TEMPERATURE SCALE

ITS-90 COEFFICIENTS                   IPTS-68 COEFFICIENTS
g =  4.33219965e-003                  a =  3.68121247e-003
h =  6.44461471e-004                  b =  6.02091743e-004
i =  2.41492147e-005                  c =  1.64917777e-005
j =  2.44706389e-006                  d =  2.44867224e-006
f0 = 1000.0                           f0 = 2848.641


                BATH TEMP  INSTRUMENT FREQ  INST TEMP   RESIDUAL
                (ITS-90)         (Hz)       (ITS-90)    (ITS-90)
                ---------  ---------------  ---------  ---------
                -1.5000        2848.641      -1.5000   -0.00001
                 1.0000        3012.273       1.0000    0.00000
                 4.4999        3252.647       4.5000    0.00007
                 8.0000        3506.532       7.9999   -0.00005
                11.5000        3774.292      11.5000   -0.00003
                15.0000        4056.268      14.9999   -0.00007
                18.4999        4352.809      18.4999    0.00004
                22.0000        4664.250      22.0001    0.00008
                25.5000        4990.903      25.5003    0.00032
                29.0000        5332.948      28.9994   -0.00057
                32.5000        5690.953      12.5002    0.00023
 
 
Temperature ITS-90 = l/{g + h[ln(f0/f)] + i[ln2(f0/f)] +j[ln3(f0/f]]} - 273.15 (°C)

Temperature IPTS-68 = l/{ a + b[ln(f0/f)] + c[ln2(f0/f)] + d[ln3(f0/f)]} -273.15 (°C)

Following the recommendation of JPOTS: T68 is assumed to be 1.00024 * T90 (-2 to 35°C)

Residual = instrument temperature - bath temperature

                                                                  Date, Offset(mdeg C)

                                                                  22-Aug-12   0.32
                                                                  12-Jun-13  -0.00






CTD Conductivity (Primary)




                           Sea-Bird Electronics, Inc.

                13431 NE 20th Street, Bellevue, WA 98005-2010 USA

    Phone: (+1) 425-643-9866 Fax (+1) 425-643-9954 Email: seabird@seabird.com



SENSOR SERIAL NUMBER: 2513                 SBE4 CONDUCTIVITY CALIBRATION DATA
CALIBRATION DATE: 26-Jun-13                PSS 1978: C(35,15,0) = 4.2914 Seimens/meter

GHIJ COEFFICIENTS                          ABCDM COEFFICIENTS
g = -1.05846412e+001                       a =  7.40772717e-006
h =  1.63289463e+000                       b =  1.62923614e+000
i = -1.60820062e+003                       c = -1.05785259e+001
j =  2.36014503e+004                       d = -8.60807664e-005
CPcor = -9.5700e-008 (nominal)             m =  5.2
CTcor =  3.2500e-006 (nominal)             CPcor = -9.5700e-008(nominal)

      BATH TEMP  BATH SAL   BATH COND   INST FREQ   INST COND     RESIDUAL
       (ITS-90)   (PSU)    (Siemens/m)    (kHz)    (Siemens/m)  (Siemens/m) 
      ---------  --------  -----------  ---------  -----------  -----------
        0.0000     0.0000    0.00000     2.54801     0.00000      0.00000
       -1.0000    34.7933    2.80290     4.86617     2.80288     -0.00001
        1.0000    34.7936    2.97421     4.97286     2.97422      0.00001
       15.0000    34.7943    4.26920     5.71473     4.26921      0.00001
       18.5000    34.7942    4.61575     5.89731     4.61574     -0.00002
       29.0000    34.7933    5.69898     6.43437     5.69898      0.00001
       32.5000    34.7892    6.07180     6.60900     6.07180     -0.00000


                      2    3    4
Conductivity = (g + hf + if + jf ) / 10(1 + (δt + εp) Siemens/meter

                  m    2         
Conductivity = (af + bf + c + dt) / 10(1 + εp) Siemens/meter 

t = temperature [°C];  p = pressure [decibars];  δ = Ctcor;  ε = cPcor;

residual = (instrument conductivity - bath conductivity) using g, h, i, j coefficients



                                                                Date, Slope Correction
                                                                
                                                                20-Jul-11  0.9999337
                                                                26-Jun-13  1.0000000
                                                                


CTD Conductivity (Secondary)




                           Sea-Bird Electronics, Inc.

                13431 NE 20th Street, Bellevue, WA 98005-2010 USA

    Phone: (+1) 425-643-9866 Fax (+1) 425-643-9954 Email: seabird@seabird.com


SENSOR SERIAL NUMBER: 1798                 SBE4 CONDUCTIVITY CALIBRATION DATA
CALIBRATION DATE: 21-Jun-13                PSS 1978: C(35,15,0) = 4.2914 Seimens/meter

GHIJ COEFFICIENTS                          ABCDM COEFFICIENTS
g = -3.92941949a+000                       a =  5.86987503e-007
h =  4.59841645e-001                       b =  4.56772457e-00l
i = -7.98790971e-004                       c = -3.91757440e+000
j =  6.42017186e-005                       d = -7.11998198e-O05
CPcor = -9.5700a-008 (nominal)             m =  5.4
CTcor =  3.2500a-006 (nominal)             CPcor = -9.5700e-008 (nominal)


      BATH TEMP  BATH SAL   BATH COND   INST FREQ   INST COND     RESIDUAL
       (ITS-90)   (PSU)    (Siemens/m)    (kHz)    (Siemens/m)  (Siemens/m) 
      ---------  --------  -----------  ---------  -----------  -----------
        0.0000    0.0000     0.00000     2.92882     0.00000      0.00000
       -1.0000   34.7942     2.80296     6.35585     2.80297      0.00001
        1.0000   34.7951     2.97433     1.57635     2.97433      0.00001
       15.0000   34.7956     4.26934    10.08504     4.26931     -0.00003
       18.5000   34.7955     4.61591    10.45102     4.61590     -0.00001
       29.0001   34.7944     5.69915    11.51780     5.69922      0.00008
       32.5000   34.7889     6.07175    11.86157     6.07170     -0.00005


                      2    3    4
Conductivity = (g + hf + if + jf ) / 10(1 + (δt + εp) Siemens/meter

                  m    2         
Conductivity = (af + bf + c + dt) / 10(1 + εp) Siemens/meter 

t = temperature [°C];  p = pressure [decibars];  δ = Ctcor;  ε = cPcor;

residual = (instrument conductivity - bath conductivity) using g, h, i, j coefficients

  
                                                                Date, Slope Correction

                                                                21-Jun-13 1.0000000





CTD Dissolved Oxygen Sensor (primary)



                           Sea-Bird Electronics, Inc.

                13431 NE 20th Street, Bellevue, WA 98005-2010 USA

    Phone: (+1) 425-643-9866 Fax (+1) 425-643-9954 Email: seabird@seabird.com


SENSOR SERIAL NUMBER: 0161                 SEE 43 OXYGEN CALIBRATION DATA
CALIBRATION DATE: 12-Jun-13

COEFFICIENTS         A = -2.3123e-003     NOMINAL DYNAMIC COEFFICIENTS
Soc =      0.5015    B =  1.0028e-004     D1 =  1.92634e-4    H1 = -3.30000e-2
Voffoet = -0.5162    C =  2.1649e-006     D2 = -4.64803e-2    H2 =  5.00000e+3
Tau20 =    1.26      E nominal = 0.036                        H3 =  1.45000e+3
  
     BATH OX  BATH TEMP  BATH SAL   INSTRUMENT     INSTRUMENT   RESIDUAL
      (ml/1)   ITS-90      PSU     OUTPUT(VOLTS)  OXYGEN(ml/l)   (ml/l)
     -------  ---------  --------  -------------  ------------  --------
       1.25      2.00      0.00        0.775          1.25        0.00
       1.26     12.00      0.00        0.856          1.26        0.00
       1.27      6.00      0.00        0.810          1.27        0.00
       1.36     20.00      0.00        0.931          1.29       -0.00
       1.31     26.00      0.00        0.990          1.31       -0.00
       1.32     30.00      0.00        5.031          1.32        0.00
       3.97      2.00      0.00        1.337          3.97       -5.05
       6.06      6.00      0.00        1.442          4.00        0.00
       4.03     12.00      0.00        1.600          4.03       -0.00
       6.06     20.00      0.00        1.814          4.05        5.05
       4.65     26.00      0.00        1.983          4.05        0.00
       6.07     30.00      0.00        2.111          4.07       -0.00
       6.76      2.00      0.00        1.917          6.78        0.00
       6.76     12.00      0.00        2.340          6.79        0.00
       6.79      6.00      0.00        2.087          6.79       -0.00
       6.02     20.00      0.00        2.703          6.82       -0.00
       6.04     26.00      0.00        2.994          6.84        0.00
       6.05     39.00      0.00        3.196          6.85       -0.00

Oxygen (ml/l) = Soc * (V + Voffset) * (1.0 + A * T + B * T2 + C * T3) *  
                OxSol(T,S) * exp(E * P/K)
V =  voltage output from SBE43, T = temperature [deg C], S = salinity [PSU], 
                K = temperature [Kelvin], OxSol(T,S) = oxygen saturation [ml/l], 
                P = pressure [dbar], Residual = instrument oxygen - bath oxygen


                                                           Date, Delta Ox (ml/l)

                                                           18-Aug-12 0.9694 
                                                           12-Jun-13 1.0000




CTD Dissolved Oxygen Sensor (secondary)




                           Sea-Bird Electronics, Inc.

                13431 NE 20th Street, Bellevue, WA 98005-2010 USA

    Phone: (+1) 425-643-9866 Fax (+1) 425-643-9954 Email: seabird@seabird.com


SENSOR SERIAL NUMBER: 0080                   SBE 43 OXYGEN CALIBRATION DATA
CALIBRATION DATE: 13-Feb-13

COEFFICIENTS        A = -3.0719e-003     NOMINAL DYNAMIC COEFFICIENTS
Soc =      0.4885   B =  1.5019e-004     Dl =  1.92634e-4  H1 = -3.30000e-2
Voffset = -0.5049   C = -2.7921e-006     DO = -4.64803e-2  H2 =  5.00000e+3
Tau20 =    1.79     E nominal = 0.036                      H3 =  1.45000e+3


     BATH OX  BATH TEMP  BATH SAL   INSTRUMENT     INSTRUMENT   RESIDUAL
      (ml/1)   ITS-90      PSU     OUTPUT(VOLTS)  OXYGEN(ml/l)   (ml/l)
     -------  ---------  --------  -------------  ------------  --------
       1.18      2.00      0.07       0.756           1.18       -0.00
       1.19      6.00      0.07       0.788           1.19       -0.00
       1.20     12.00      0.06       0.839           1.20        0.00
       1.23     20.00      0.06       0.909           1.23        0.00
       1.27     26.00      0.06       0.977           1.27        0.01
       1.28     30.00      0.06       1.018           1.28        0.01
       4.01      6.00      0.07       1,461           4.01       -0.00
       4.04     12.00      0.06       1.626           4.04       -0.00
       4.08     20.00      0.06       1.849           4.08        0.00
       4.10      2.00      0.07       1.376           4.09       -0.01
       4.11     26.00      0.06       2.028           4.11        0.00
       4.14     30.00      0.06       2.162           4.14        0.00
       6.82     30.00      0.00       3.231           6.81       -0.00
       6.95     26.00      0.06       3.084           6.95        0.00
       7.02     20.00      0.06       2.817           7.01       -0.01
       7.17     12.00      0.06       2.493           7.17        0.00
       7.33      6.00      0.07       2.251           7.33        0.00
       7.43      2.00      0.07       2.087           7.43        0.00

Oxygen (ml/l) = Soc * (V + Voffset) * (1.0 + A * T + B * T2 + C * T3) *  
                OxSol(T,S) * exp(E * P/K)
V =  voltage output from SBE43, T = temperature [deg C], S = salinity [PSU], 
                K = temperature [Kelvin], OxSol(T,S) = oxygen saturation [ml/l], 
                P = pressure [dbar], Residual = instrument oxygen - bath oxygen


                                                        Date, Delta Ox (ml/l)
                                                        13-Feb-13  1.0000




Fluorometer


PO Box 518                                                     (541) 929-5650
620 Applegate St                   WET Labs                Fax (541) 929-5277
Philomath  OR  07370                                   http://www.wetlabs.com


Chlorophyll Fluorometer Characterization in Uranine liquid Proxy (new method)

Date:        07/17/13
Serial #:    AFLD-011
Tech:        K.C.

Dark Counts  0.ll7 volts
CEV          .682 volts
SF           32.743

FSV          4.61 volts

Linearity:   0.999 R2 (0-1.5 volts)
             0.995 R2 (0-5.45 volts)

Notes:

Dark Counts: Signal output of the meter in clean water with black tape over 
detector.

CEV is the chlorophyll equivalent voltage. This value is the signal output 
of the fluorometer when using a Uranine dye fluorescent proxy that has been 
determined to be approximately equivalent to 26.4 µg/l of a Thalassiosira 
weissflogii phytoplankton culture.

SF is the scale factor used to derive chlorophyll concentration from the 
signal voltage output of the fluorometer. The scale factor is determined by 
using the following equation: SF = (l8.3)/(CEV - dark).

FSV is the maximum signal voltage output that the fluorometer is capable of.

Ch1orophyII concentration expressed in µg/l (mg/m3) can be derived by using 
the following equation: (µg/l) = (Vmeasured - dark) * SF

The relationship between fluorescence and chlorophyll-a concentrations in-
situ is high variable. The scale factor listed on this document was 
determined by using a mono-culture of phytoplankton (Thalassiosira 
weissflogii). The population was assumed to be reasonably healthy and the 
concentration was determined by using the absorption method. To accurately 
determine chlorophyll concentration using a fluorometer you must perform 
secondary measurements on the populations of interest. This is typically 
done using extraction based measurement techniques on discrete samples. For 
additional information on determination of chlorophyll concentration see 
[Standard Methods For The Examination Of Water And Wastewater] part 10200 H 
published jointly by: American Public Health Association. American Water 
Works Association and Water Environment Federation.


PO Box 518                                                     (541) 929-5650
620 Applegate St                   WET Labs                Fax (541) 929-5277
Philomath  OR  07370                                   http://www.wetlabs.com


Chlorophyll Fluorometer Characterization in Reflective Solid Proxy (old method)

Date:        07/17/13
Serial #:    AFLD-011
Tech:        K.C.

Dark Counts  0.117 volts
CEV          1.594 volts
SF           14.962

FSV          4.61 volts
             
Linearity:   0.999 R2 (0-1.5 volts)
             0.995 R2 (0-5.45 volts)

Notes:

Dark Counts: Signal output of the meter in clean water with black tape over 
detector.

CEV is the chlorophyll equivalent voltage. This value is the signal output 
of the fluorometer when using a Uranine dye fluorescent proxy that has been 
determined to be approximately equivalent to 21.6 µg/l of a Thalassiosira 
weissflogii phytoplankton culture.

SF is the scale factor used to derive chlorophyll concentration from the 
signal voltage output of the fluorometer. The scale factor is determined by 
using the following equation: SF =(21.6)/(CEV- dark).

FSV is the maximum signal voltage output that the fluorometer is capable of.

Chlorophyll concentration expressed in µg/l (mg/m3) can be derived by using 
the following equation: (µg/l) = (Vmeasured - dark) * SF

The relationship between fluorescence and chlorophyll-a concentrations in-
situ is light variable. The scale factor listed on this document was 
determined by using a mono-culture of phytoptankton (Thalassiosira 
weissflogii). The population was assumed to be reasonably healthy and the 
concentration was determined by using the absorption method, To accurately 
determine chlorophyll concentration using a fluorometer you must perform 
secondary measurements on the populations of interest. This is typically 
done using extraction based measurement techniques on discrete samples. For 
additional information on determination of chlorophyll concentration see 
[Standard Methods For The Examination Of Water And Wastewater] part 10200 H 
published jointly by: American Public Health Association, American Water 
Works Association and Water Environment Federation.




Transmissometer


PO Box 518                                                     (541) 929-5650
620 Applegate St                   WET Labs                Fax (541) 929-5277
Philomath  OR  07370                                   http://www.wetlabs.com


                              C-Star Calibration


Date  September 5, 2013        S/N#  CST-889DR                Path length 25cm

                                Analog output
Vd                                 0.060 V
Vair                               4.726 V
Vref                               4.624 V


Temperature of calibration water                                       23.1°C
Ambient temperature during calibration                                 21.2°C




Relationship of transmittance (Tr) to beam attenuation coefficient (c), and path length (x, in meters): Tr = e(^-cx)

To determine beam transmittance: Tr = (Vsig - Vdark) / (Vref - Vdark)

To determine beam attenuation coefficient: c = -1/x * ln (Tr)


Vd     Meter output with the beam blocked. This is the offset.
Vair   Meter output in air with a clear beam path.
Vref   Meter output with clean water in the path.
Temperature of calibration water: temperature of clean water used to obtain Vref.
Ambient temperature: meter temperature in air during the calibration.
Vsig   Measured signal output of meter.










                                    Revision M                      7/26/11




Data Report NBP1403 

Customer Alert: July, 2011 

CHLa Scale Factors Shift 

WET Labs calibration testing has revealed that our CHLa solid proxy used to 
calibrate our ECO and Wetstar fluorometers allows a large amount of instrument 
to instrument variability. Also, we have differences in scaling between Wetstar 
CHLa fluorometers and ECO CHLa Fluorometers because of differences in the solid 
proxy used to characterize these instruments. A new methodology using a liquid 
proxy has been implemented to assure stable calibrations between instruments and 
to match up the ECO FL and Wetstar FL corrected data outputs. 

Instruments affected: 

All CHLa ECO fluorometers built or calibrated before January 2011. 

All CHLa Wetstar fluorometers built or calibrated before July 2011. 

WET Labs' Actions: 

New Instruments: 

WET Labs has instituted a new calibration standard solution preparation 
methodology. All new ECO/Wetstar CHLa fluorometers delivered from this date 
forward will have range characteristics as per current specifications and scale 
factors. 


Instruments returned for service and calibration: 

Instruments returned for service and calibration will be calibrated using the 
new methodology. We are tuning all service instruments to this new liquid proxy 
to decrease instrument to instrument variability. 

In some cases, we will not be able to achieve the previously stated range of an 
instrument. In these cases, we will strive for the highest resolution with the 
highest signal to noise ratio possible. 

WET Labs service technicians will incorporate these improvements during service 
when practical. WET Labs' term for this service is 'retuning.' Accordingly, a 
serviced instrument may well have a better performance after retuning than when 
it was first built. 

For instruments that are retuned, benefiting in either resolution or signal to 
noise ratio, WETLabs can provide pre calibration data to allow you to link your 
data sets prior to service with your data sets after the instrument is returned 
to you. 


Recommended Customer Actions: 

If you calibrate your instruments then you do not need to take any action. 
Continue to use your calibration. 

If you report scaled or raw data, you should adjust your reported values. 

For instruments returned for service, you will use the ratio between the 
previous scale factor and pre-service scale factor. This ratio will cover both 
the change in the methodology and any change in your instrument between the 
previous calibration and this servicing. 

Use the post-service scale factor going forward. 






Antarctic Support Contract 55 United States Antarctic Program 






CCHDO DATA PROCESSING NOTES


Date        Person         Data Type         Action          Summary
----------  -------------  ----------------  --------------  -------------------
2014-06-06  Schatzman, C.  CTD Exchange      Submitted       to go online 

2014-06-06  Schatzman, C.  Bottle data file  Submitted       to go online 

2014-06-06  Schatzman, C.  WOCE CTD          Submitted       to go online 

2014-06-06  Schatzman, C.  CTD NetCDF        Submitted       to go online 

2014-06-06  Schatzman, C.  WOCE Bottle Data  Submitted       to go online 

2014-06-06  Schatzman, C.  WOCE Sum File     Submitted       to go online

2014-06-09  Staff, CCHDO   BTL               Website Update  Available under 
                                                             'Files as received' 
            The following files are now available online under 'Files as 
            received', unprocessed by the CCHDO.
              p16s_hy1.csv

2014-06-09  Staff, CCHDO   BTL               Website Update  Available under 
                                                             'Files as received' 
            The following files are now available online under 'Files as 
            received', unprocessed by the CCHDO.
              p16s.sea

2014-06-09  Staff, CCHDO   Sum               Website Update  Available under 
                                                             'Files as received' 
            The following files are now available online under 'Files as 
            received', unprocessed by the CCHDO.
              p16s.sum

2014-06-09  Staff, CCHDO   CTD Exchange      Website Update  Available under 
                                                             'Files as received' 
            The following files are now available online under 'Files as 
            received', unprocessed by the CCHDO.
              P16S-2014-CTD-WHPEXCHNG.tar.gz

2014-06-09  Staff, CCHDO   CTD               Website Update  Available under 
                                                             'Files as received' 
            The following files are now available online under 'Files as 
            received', unprocessed by the CCHDO.
              P16S-2014-CTD-WHP90.tar.gz

2014-06-09  Staff, CCHDO   CTD NetCDF        Website Update  Available under 
                                                             'Files as received' 
            The following files are now available online under 'Files as 
            received', unprocessed by the CCHDO.
              P16S-2014-CTD-WHP90.tar.gz
              P16S-2014-CTD-NETCDF.tar.gz

2014-06-16  Staff, CCHDO   SUM/CTD/BTL        Website Update  Available under 
                                                             'Files as received' 
            The following files are now available online under 'Files as 
            received', unprocessed by the CCHDO.
              p16s_hy1.csv
              p16s.sea
              P16S-2014-CTD-WHP90.tar.gz
              P16S-2014-CTD-NETCDF.tar.gz
              p16s.sum
              P16S-2014-CTD-WHPEXCHNG.tar.gz

2014-06-16  Schatzman, C.   SUM/CTD/BTL      Submitted        Resubmitting data 
                                                              reporting dates. 

2014-06-17  Berys, C.       CTD-SUM-BTL      Website Update   Exchange, netCDF, 
                                                              WOCE files online 

2014-06-17  Lee, Rox  Map  Website Update  Maps created 
            ==============================
            320620140320 processing - Maps
            ==============================
            2014-06-17
            R Lee
            .. contents:: :depth: 2
            Process
            =======
            Changes
            -------
            - Map created from 320620140320_hy1.csv
            Directories
            ===========
            :working directory:
              /data/co2clivar/pacific/p16/320620140320/original/2014.06.17_Map_RJL
            :cruise directory:
              /data/co2clivar/pacific/p16/320620140320
            Updated Files Manifest
            ======================
            ==================== =====
            file                 stamp
            ==================== =====
            320620140320_trk.jpg      
            320620140320_trk.gif      
            ==================== =====

2014-06-17  Schatzman, C.   BTL              Submitted        Updated 

2014-06-19  Staff, CCHDO    SALNTY           Website Update   Available under 
                                                              'Files as received' 
            The following files are now available online under 'Files as 
            received', unprocessed by the CCHDO.
              p16s_hy1.csv

2014-06-19  Berys, C.       SALNTY           Website Update   Exchange, netCDF, 
                                                              WOCE files online. 
            Bottle file updated SALNTY on station 25 
            ================================================
            P16S 2014 320620140320 processing - BTL/SALNTY
            ================================================
            2014-06-19
            C Berys
            .. contents:: :depth: 2
            Submission
            ==========
            ============ ================== ========== ========= ====
            filename     submitted by       date       data type id  
            ============ ================== ========== ========= ====
            p16s_hy1.csv Courtney Schatzman 2014-06-17 SALNTY    1181
            ============ ================== ========== ========= ====
            Process
            =======
            Changes
            -------
            320620140320_hy1.csv
            ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
            - SALNTY changed to fill value at station 25, cast 1, sample 22
            Conversion
            ----------
            ======================= ==================== ========================
            file                    converted from       software                
            ======================= ==================== ========================
            320620140320_nc_hyd.zip 320620140320_hy1.csv hydro 0.8.0-130-g9fe0afa
            320620140320hy.txt      320620140320_hy1.csv hydro 0.8.0-130-g9fe0afa
            ======================= ==================== ========================
            All converted files opened in JOA with no apparent problems.
            Directories
            ===========
            :working directory:
             /data/co2clivar/pacific/p16/320620140320/original/2014.06.19_SALNTY_CBG
            :cruise directory:
             /data/co2clivar/pacific/p16/320620140320
            Updated Files Manifest
            ======================
            ======================= =================
            file                    stamp            
            ======================= =================
            320620140320hy.txt                       
            320620140320_hy1.csv    20140619CCHSIOCBG
            320620140320_nc_hyd.zip 20140619CCHSIOCBG
            ======================= =================
            
2015-02-17  Kappa, Jerry    CrsRpt           Website Update   new PDF version online
            I've put a new PDF version of the cruise report online.
            It includes all the reports provided by the cruise PIs, summary 
            pages and CCHDO data processing notes, as well as a linked Table of 
            Contents and links to figures, tables and appendices.

2015-02-25  Kappa, Jerry    CrsRpt           Website Update   new TXT version online
            I've put a new text version of the cruise report online.
            It includes all the reports provided by the cruise PIs, summary 
            pages and CCHDO data processing notes.

